[Amit Varma]: How well do you know yourself? I don't mean this question in a sense of self-reflection
[Amit Varma]: in some metaphysical or existential sense. I mean your material self. How well do you
[Amit Varma]: know your body? Do you know what the food you eat does to your body? Do you know what
[Amit Varma]: hormones are released when you don't get enough sleep? Or why staring into a screen
[Amit Varma]: all day alters your chemistry? Often, we lack the tools to measure these things. But even
[Amit Varma]: if we had them all, I suspect we would be in denial. Unless we fell ill and had no choice
[Amit Varma]: but to solve that problem. Or unless we played sports and the incentives were aligned. By
[Amit Varma]: knowing our bodies, we can not just live healthier and longer, but we can be the best version
[Amit Varma]: of ourselves. And we can also discover, if we truly test ourselves, that our limits are
[Amit Varma]: not where we thought they were, and that we can go beyond what we thought possible. This
[Amit Varma]: is not just true of sports or physical activity. This is true of life. Sometimes other people
[Amit Varma]: place limits on us, and sometimes we do it to ourselves. Don't let that happen.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Scene and the Unseen. My guest today is Shruti Jagirdar, a volleyball player,
[Amit Varma]: a fitness freak, a trained nutritionist, a start-up founder, and a petroleum engineer by training.
[Amit Varma]: Shruti is based in Berlin, and I met her on Twitter, where we interacted a bit, and then
[Amit Varma]: she said I really must do an episode on women's sports in India. That seemed like a great
[Amit Varma]: idea to me. I'd done an episode with Snehal Pradhan, but that had looked mainly at cricket
[Amit Varma]: and covered a lot else apart from sport. It's a great episode. So I asked Shruti to suggest
[Amit Varma]: a guest, and she gave me a few names. But while talking about her experiences, I realised
[Amit Varma]: that hey, I had the perfect guest. And there was a lot else we could talk about, as she's
[Amit Varma]: a trained nutritionist who goes beyond the flawed conventional wisdom of the day. She
[Amit Varma]: runs a fitness start-up. She's trained for the MMA in Thailand's top mixed martial arts
[Amit Varma]: school. She's run through the desert in the UAE. And she's overall done such crazy things
[Amit Varma]: that I lost a bunch of galleries just listening to her stories. This conversation was recorded
[Amit Varma]: when she came to India and visited Mumbai, where we recorded at my home studio. I found
[Amit Varma]: it both fun and enlightening. But before we get to it, let's take a commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: Have you always wanted to be a writer, but never quite gotten down to it? Well, I'd love
[Amit Varma]: to help you. Since April 2020, I've taught 20 cohorts of my online course, The Art of
[Amit Varma]: Clear Writing. An online community has now sprung up of all my past students. We have
[Amit Varma]: workshops, a newsletter to showcase the work of students, and vibrant community interaction.
[Amit Varma]: In the course itself, through 4 webinars spread over 4 weekends, I share all I know about
[Amit Varma]: the craft and practice of clear writing. There are many exercises, much interaction, a lovely
[Amit Varma]: and lively community at the end of it. The course costs Rs 10,000 plus GST or about $150
[Amit Varma]: and is a monthly thing. So if you're interested, head on over to register at indiancut.com
[Amit Varma]: slash clear writing. That's indiancut.com slash clear writing. Being a good writer doesn't
[Amit Varma]: require God-given talent, just the willingness to work hard and a clear idea of what you
[Amit Varma]: need to do to refine your skills. I can help you.
[Amit Varma]: Shruti, welcome to the scene and the unseen. Thank you for having me Amit.
[Amit Varma]: So I was just chatting on WhatsApp yesterday with a frequent guest on my show Shruti Rajgopalan
[Amit Varma]: and I told her that I'm recording with another Shruti tomorrow and her antennae immediately
[Amit Varma]: went up and she was like, who, who, who? And then I sort of send your Twitter bio. And
[Amit Varma]: this is an interesting recording for me because on the one hand, it's about a subject that
[Amit Varma]: I haven't really thought about too much. Sport, especially the kind of sport that you have
[Amit Varma]: experienced in and also things like fitness and nutrition and all of that. So it almost
[Amit Varma]: feels like I'm traveling a little bit out of my comfort zone in terms of subjects I
[Amit Varma]: know a hell of a lot about. But at the same time, I'm really glad I'm doing so because
[Amit Varma]: I'll hopefully get to learn a lot. But tell me where you are now and what you do now and
[Guest]: what are you doing in Bombay right now? Yeah, I guess apart from, from recording this
[Guest]: podcast with you in Bombay, I am right now based in Berlin. Very late in my life, I took
[Guest]: the decision to do an MBA. And, and I realized I'm getting to an age where the MBA colleges
[Guest]: might not want me. So I better do it now. And so I'm based in Berlin and I'm studying
[Guest]: at the moment. But prior to that, I came from Pune, and I studied engineering. And yeah,
[Amit Varma]: you want me to get into? No, we'll get to that. We'll get to that in just a bit right
[Amit Varma]: from the very start. But you know, so the way we connected was you wrote to me on Twitter,
[Amit Varma]: and we had a conversation there and all of that. You know, over lunch, I was finding
[Amit Varma]: your sort of use of Twitter fascinating in the sense that you went on for a brief while
[Amit Varma]: when the Chennai floods happened, and you went off, then you came back, then you found
[Amit Varma]: that there are good things and bad things about it. Let me check out what they're like.
[Amit Varma]: And the good thing, of course, is that people like you and I can connect and Twitter is
[Amit Varma]: something that I really have mixed feelings about. Because on the one hand, it's a toxic
[Amit Varma]: space, the discourse is so polarized, the most unpleasant people in the world get a
[Amit Varma]: platform to, you know, attack you and get personal if that's what they want to do. And
[Amit Varma]: it can be really ugly. But at the same time, it's a beautiful space and two margins. And
[Amit Varma]: one of them is that you can curate your own feed, you have the best minds in the world
[Amit Varma]: thinking aloud every day, for your benefit, you know, where else do you get that? That's
[Amit Varma]: mind blowing. And the other is that people can just connect like you, you and I could
[Amit Varma]: have a conversation about what you do on Twitter, and you are in Berlin, and I'm here and now
[Amit Varma]: here you are, and we are sitting in kind of recording this. So what is your sense of Twitter
[Amit Varma]: given that you are a relatively new person that before you really got active, you thought
[Amit Varma]: about it. And for the rest of us jaded Twitterites, it might be, you know, the both the good and
[Amit Varma]: the bad might be normalized.
[Guest]: Yeah, so yeah, you're absolutely right. I was on Twitter in 2015, just to see how I
[Guest]: could help the Chennai flood situation. And then I did a little bit of it for a month
[Guest]: or so and, and then just got off it. I also feel that a lot of people who are engineers
[Guest]: who are in the corporate, doing, you know, their desk jobs, most of them are not too
[Guest]: active on Twitter. I mean, if you talk about a large part of my circle as well, none of
[Guest]: them are on Twitter. That's another reason why I probably never got back on to Twitter
[Guest]: until 2021. Because I was active on Instagram. And I was active because I've traveled quite
[Guest]: a lot. And I know quite a lot of people that I don't see regularly. And they're all on
[Guest]: my Instagram. And so I was active there. Although I got on to Instagram as well very late in
[Guest]: 18 and 19. But then back, back in 2021, I came came on to Twitter to check what how
[Guest]: people were helping with the second wave during COVID. Then I did a bit bit of work with some
[Guest]: some groups that were calling different places and checking on the bed situation, the oxygen
[Guest]: cylinder situation. And when that was done, I stayed back because I sort of found a couple
[Guest]: of handles that I hadn't seen on Instagram, or if I did follow them, they were not active.
[Guest]: And I think you know, I'm a big fan of the Wait But Why blog by Tim Urban. And I saw
[Guest]: that he had he was very active on Twitter. Some some artists that I like are on active
[Guest]: on Twitter. And I was like, hey, these people are not very active on Instagram. So maybe
[Guest]: I should stick around and I should I should see if I get to learn a little bit here. And
[Guest]: it was a weird space to navigate. Because, you know, when you open an Instagram account,
[Guest]: you instantly have at least 50 or 70 of your friends just following you. And then you sort
[Guest]: of have conversations, somebody's liking your pictures, and you know, these are your friends.
[Guest]: But with Twitter, I sort of always felt that, hey, I know nobody here, like none of my really
[Guest]: close friends are on Twitter, or if they are, they're not very active, because of my background,
[Guest]: which is engineering and not a lot of engineers on it. So I stayed on it, I started following
[Guest]: people that I liked. And what actually made me really stay on Twitter was some women I
[Guest]: was following. And how articulate they were on Twitter. And how bold they were on Twitter.
[Guest]: I really, really admired them. I admired the depth of their knowledge, or the depth of
[Guest]: their opinion, how strongly opinionated they were. And I mean, there was a variety of people,
[Guest]: there were artists and actors, there were geoscientists and a variety of writers. And
[Guest]: I was really impressed. And I was like, hey, you know, this is something I would like to
[Guest]: learn, if at all, and where are they getting it from? And also, I was not so exposed to
[Guest]: the wider world, in terms of me putting my opinions out there. Because I wasn't on Twitter.
[Guest]: And because I was trying and setting up my own startup at the time, I was literally sort
[Guest]: of 24 hours of my time sucked into making my startup work. So I had absolutely no time
[Guest]: to get onto Twitter and find out what's happening with the world. And then at some point, I
[Guest]: realized that, hey, if I am on Twitter, it's sort of prompting me to put my opinion on
[Guest]: it. Because I do have opinions, I am opinionated. And now you're reading someone else's opinions,
[Guest]: and it's triggering you, or in a good way, your thoughts. And then you're like, hey,
[Guest]: now I want to share what I feel about this. And then after I was on it for about three
[Guest]: or four or five months, I was sort of looking back at a couple of my own tweets and feeling
[Guest]: like, hey, I did not know I could express myself like this. It doesn't matter how many
[Guest]: people had liked those tweets or whatever. But I hadn't tested myself on really putting
[Guest]: my opinions through in writing, especially in a short form writing. And so to be very
[Guest]: honest for me, Twitter is about how I am learning and discovering what I am, what topics really
[Guest]: trigger me positively or negatively, what topics prompt me to tweet, what sort of people
[Guest]: do I really enjoy following. Sometimes I even feel like there are a lot of people who are
[Guest]: popular on Twitter, who are very intelligent, who write well. But then sometimes I look
[Guest]: at their tweets and I'm like, hey, these tweets don't connect with me, the way they write.
[Guest]: They are very emotionless. And sometimes you go back and read these people's writing, like
[Guest]: they could be writing articles or op-eds or whatever. And you feel like, yeah, perhaps
[Guest]: that's their job. The article they are writing, maybe the writing is great, but it doesn't
[Guest]: require them to emote in it, in a way. And then you see that in their tweets as well.
[Guest]: And even that I have learned about myself, that there is a certain form of tweeting or
[Guest]: expressing that I do not like, I do not want to do that. So it's really self-exploration
[Guest]: for me. And sometimes I feel very, very frustrated with myself because I look at Twitter and
[Guest]: I'm like, hey, this is a space for, you know, journalists, artists, people who have very
[Guest]: specific skill sets. And here I am, who's an engineer, who's a bit of a generalist.
[Guest]: And sometimes I feel like, hey, what do I really tweet about? Why should I be on Twitter?
[Guest]: And it frustrates me. I sometimes look at my tweets and I'm like, hey, I don't have
[Guest]: political opinions. And, okay, I may have them sometimes, but you can't identify my
[Guest]: account as a political commentary. And then I'm also not maybe, you know, so, so much
[Guest]: into tweeting about the startup world, because I'm also a little aware of the fact that I
[Guest]: don't want to give gyan on Twitter, because I have experienced something, make my Twitter
[Guest]: account into an advice forum. I don't want that to happen. I'm not a poet. I'm not a
[Guest]: writer. I'm not a journalist. I'm not an artist who, by their popularity itself, get followers.
[Guest]: So sometimes it really frustrates me. And I'm asking myself, why am I on Twitter? What
[Guest]: am I tweeting about? Why is anybody following me at all? You know, but I guess that's part
[Guest]: of the excitement.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. And it's also fascinating how there is this dichotomy, almost like a Jekyll and
[Amit Varma]: Hyde side of Twitter, in the sense that something that you remarked upon earlier during lunch
[Amit Varma]: is how so many people, so many women, especially, are so open with sharing what they go through.
[Amit Varma]: And that can be valuable to other women as well, because it can tell them that they're
[Amit Varma]: not alone in terms of what people are feeling, it can maybe show them a way forward and all
[Amit Varma]: of that. And just even outside of the context of women tweeting and women reading, I just
[Amit Varma]: feel that, you know, the most magical kind of interactions I have had in general through
[Amit Varma]: the internet, not just Twitter, are those personal ones, where you get to feel like
[Amit Varma]: you know someone personally, either because you're reading something from them, or maybe
[Amit Varma]: you've written something and that's touched them and they reach out to you. And those
[Amit Varma]: personal connections are valuable. Like I certainly feel these with many of my writing
[Amit Varma]: students, including people I haven't met in, you know, in real life, that you over time,
[Amit Varma]: you build a connection, you talk so much. And that can be one of the beautiful things
[Amit Varma]: of Twitter, that you have these personal connections between people sharing their lives and their
[Amit Varma]: thoughts in good faith. But it's also a space which is incredibly public, incredibly toxic,
[Amit Varma]: that you could say something in one context, which is making you vulnerable and revealing
[Amit Varma]: a side of you. And then the next day, you have people picking that up as a gotcha moment
[Guest]: and attacking you and misinterpreting that and all of that.
[Guest]: That happened with me as well. I was, I was very new on Twitter. I think I replied to
[Guest]: somebody's tweet. And I made a comment about ambition. And I, of course, made it in a very
[Guest]: specific context. But as we will maybe get into it a little bit later, you know, the
[Guest]: moment you use the words ambition and competition, people take it personally. And they have become
[Guest]: topics where, you know, it's very easy for people to start saying things like, oh, but,
[Guest]: you know, why should everybody be competitive? Why should everybody have ambition and then
[Guest]: just get into, I think, the circular discussion. And somebody, some people started trolling
[Guest]: me on it. And it doesn't bother me. But yeah, it sometimes you, none of what you do or say
[Guest]: on Twitter is controversial, nor is your account that big. But then something gets picked up.
[Guest]: And people start trolling. And you're just looking at it. And you're like, you know,
[Guest]: this is so out of context, this whole trolling bit of it. But yeah, that's life on Twitter.
[Amit Varma]: That's life on Twitter. Tell me about life before Twitter. So, you know, where were you
[Guest]: born? What was your childhood like? So I was born in Pune. My parents both met in Pune.
[Guest]: My father studied journalism in Pune. And he was a freelance journalist for the Indian
[Guest]: Express and Times of India. And he started in Bombay TV actually, and then moved to Pune.
[Guest]: And he worked in the Film and Television Institute as a senior faculty for direction.
[Guest]: Which years? He retired in 2011, actually. So the 30 years
[Amit Varma]: before that. So my dad was director of FTII between 86 and 91.
[Amit Varma]: Then I'm sure he knows him. Yeah, yeah. I mean, yeah, small world. Yeah.
[Guest]: So and my mom was acting in films and very, very active in theatre, in Marathi theatre
[Guest]: in Pune. And they met in the Film and Television Institute when mom was shooting for something.
[Guest]: Then I was born in Pune and studied there. I studied petroleum engineering. And as we
[Guest]: discussed before as well, at lunch, we have Ferguson College in common as well, which
[Guest]: is very close to I think all Punekar's hearts. And yeah, I pretty much grew up in a middle
[Guest]: class, upper middle class Maharashtrian setup. And very proud of my Pune background as all
[Guest]: Punekars are. Always had a very active life. And the best part about Pune is it's surrounded
[Guest]: by hills. Yeah, that's pretty much it. Used to go up the hills, do a lot of sport. Due
[Guest]: to my family's background in art, I guess, always enjoyed music, films, reading. So got
[Guest]: the best of both worlds. Enjoyed sport while growing up, enjoyed art a lot. Went to Abhinav
[Guest]: Vidyalaya, which was at the time sort of a unique school for Pune. Very popular, but
[Guest]: not a convent. So an English medium school, but which wasn't a convent. And it was started
[Guest]: by a lady who came up with a concept of a school where she was like, I'm going to expose
[Guest]: children to each and every form of exploring their skills. So we would have all kinds of
[Guest]: activities in school. The school would support it and including academics and sport. And
[Guest]: I guess that's how I really, really got into sport as well.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, yeah. And you just made me nostalgic by mentioning the tekris we used to go up
[Guest]: and down in Ferguson. Anywhere and everywhere, you feel like you want to climb, you can find
[Amit Varma]: an entry point.
[Amit Varma]: So this brings me to a tangential question. Like one, of course, there were the tekris
[Amit Varma]: of people who wanted to climb, could climb. And two, you happen to be in a school where
[Amit Varma]: you were exposed to everything, including sport. But by and large, you know, the environment
[Amit Varma]: for Indians is just not, doesn't seem to be conducive to sport. Like we just don't have
[Amit Varma]: a sporting culture. You go to Australia, Europe or whatever, people will engage in sport beyond
[Amit Varma]: watching sport on TV and giving gyan on Twitter. They'll actually go out and play different
[Amit Varma]: sports and they'll go out surfing on the weekend or whatever. They'll be doing things. But
[Amit Varma]: Indians have never had that kind of sporting culture. And there are, of course, various
[Amit Varma]: theories for it, like, hey, the weather is too hot, which to me is not a great theory
[Amit Varma]: because you know, even Brazil produces such great footballers and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: And it's kind of similar weather there, isn't it? So what is your sense of why we don't
[Amit Varma]: have that kind of sporting culture? Is it a vicious circle that at some point you have
[Amit Varma]: an equilibrium where perhaps people are too poor to have leisure time and there just isn't
[Amit Varma]: much sport? And then that sort of, you know, feeds on itself and the culture never forms?
[Amit Varma]: Or are there external factors to it also? Or what is sort of your sense of that?
[Guest]: Yeah, for sure. It's a mix of, Amit, it's a mix of things. I think first and foremost
[Guest]: is the mindset. It doesn't have to be only sport. If you find children that are interested
[Guest]: in arts or show an early inclination towards a specific art form or sport, it's the school
[Guest]: and the parents, I think, in India that do not give it the importance that they give
[Guest]: academics. Even now, I have rarely seen parents who say, hey, you know, my son has been doing
[Guest]: so well at sports or my daughter's been doing so well at sport. I'm a fine if they drop
[Guest]: out after 12th. And I honestly feel if you want to develop as a sportsman, you cannot
[Guest]: say that I'm doing it parallelly. I'm that, hey, I'm going to be doing okay at my studies
[Guest]: at the same time parallelly give time to sport. Then you cannot say I want to be world class.
[Guest]: Because it needs the time it needs, not only for skill development, but also physical fitness
[Guest]: and growing up as an individual. So if you look at countries outside of India, the sportsmen
[Guest]: that do well in their teams itself, like take Coco Gough, for example, in tennis, who went
[Guest]: to the third or the fourth round in the French Open in her first showing a couple of years
[Guest]: ago, was just 16 years old. So I think, first of all, countries outside of India have that
[Guest]: ability to spot talent, and then say that, hey, you know, this is what you need to do
[Guest]: now. And we have a program for you. And that program then includes letting the person,
[Guest]: letting the sportsman grow as an individual as well. What that person can do in terms
[Guest]: of their sporting skill is a part of the process. They've shown that they're prodigal or whatever.
[Guest]: And the skill development continues on the side, the strategy and planning what tournaments
[Guest]: to enter, everything. But I think the countries are, apart from India, they're also looking
[Guest]: at how this sportsman can grow as a person. And if that can happen in time, then they
[Guest]: can compete at international levels with sportsmen much older than them. So for example, Coco
[Guest]: Gough played the first round with Venus Williams on her first showing, and she beat Venus.
[Guest]: And you know, just to be able to play a match in a Grand Slam with a sportsman you've grown
[Guest]: up admiring, no matter how, you know, no matter how senior Venus is to her, Venus can really
[Guest]: beat a 16 year old purely based on how experienced she is. But to give her a tough competition
[Guest]: and then at the end of the match at the net, literally, you know, hug her and say that,
[Guest]: hey, I grew up looking at you, but not have that feeling when you're her opponent. To
[Guest]: teach all those things that you need to first grow as a person. And if they can make a 16
[Guest]: year old understand that, then she can become a competitor at an international level. Now
[Guest]: when you come to India, what is the 16 year old doing on average in India? We are probably
[Guest]: writing our 10th standard exams. Everybody in the society is asking you, oh, which college
[Guest]: you're going to take, what stream you're going to take, and how much did you score, how much
[Guest]: did your friends score. And that is where I think the problem is that we do not allow
[Guest]: somebody to say, hey, academics is not my thing. You know, you should be able to say
[Guest]: that openly and say that I am spending eight hours of my day not in school, but in a sports
[Guest]: school. And we will talk when I have done something in what I am focusing on. So it's
[Guest]: really the society. But also if you talk about infrastructure, we don't have the kind of
[Guest]: infrastructure that can allow world class sportsmen to really shine. So I have in my
[Guest]: school as well, had the company of a lot of sportsmen who represented India internationally.
[Guest]: In TT, now I know somebody in rock climbing, I have played with women volleyballers who
[Guest]: played for the international team. And at some point, everybody says that, hey, okay,
[Guest]: fine, I played nationals, internationals, everything, but what does this give me in
[Guest]: terms of career? And I guess that's also another reason why parents don't really see a future
[Guest]: and don't want to promote a skill beyond a certain point. So I think it's everything.
[Guest]: It's infrastructure, it's mindset, it's actually not having enough opportunities compared to
[Guest]: studying and doing something with your life. Yeah, I would say that that's the difference,
[Guest]: I guess, countries outside of Australia and the US especially. I was just speaking to
[Guest]: a friend of mine two months ago, she's Spanish, and she spent two years in high school in
[Guest]: the US. And over a conversation, she told me that, you know, I was doing swimming when
[Guest]: I was in US and I was winning. And I had this final competition, maybe school level competition
[Guest]: or something on the day of the final exam. The authorities at school just called me and
[Guest]: said, go do your swimming, win medals, do not even worry about your exam, you're going
[Guest]: to get 100%. Now, you know, I've been excused on a lot of my sports tournaments as well.
[Guest]: But nobody tells you in these terms, you know, just go do your thing, we are going to take
[Guest]: care of your studies and we are going to pass you or nobody, you don't hear it in these
[Guest]: very words. So that's the kind of support and this is this is just for somebody who
[Guest]: was studying high school and who was probably just doing sport because at that time, she
[Guest]: was liking the sport. So imagine if they actually found somebody who had very high potential,
[Guest]: what kind of support that person must be seeing?
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, lots to double click on like one of the just tangentially thinking aloud, you
[Amit Varma]: know what you said about needing to grow someone as a person. I remember back in the day when
[Amit Varma]: I was covering cricket, we used to discuss why so much young talent from Pakistan that
[Amit Varma]: would come into cricket would just blaze their way to the top of the game and then completely
[Amit Varma]: fall apart and disappear. And this was a pattern that kept happening in the 90s and the early
[Amit Varma]: 2000s and all of that and I don't follow the game closely enough to know how it is now.
[Amit Varma]: And my feeling at the time was, and I think Harsha Bhogle agreed with me in a conversation
[Amit Varma]: that I had with him, maybe we discussed it on a podcast, I don't remember. But the gist
[Amit Varma]: of it was that because Pakistan didn't have a middle class per se, it was either really
[Amit Varma]: poor people or it was an elite at the top. And your cricketers, this enormous talent
[Amit Varma]: would emerge from, you know, the lower layer, they would not then have the sort of the social
[Amit Varma]: and cultural tools to be able to deal with the sudden success and the sudden fame and
[Amit Varma]: the sudden money and everything that attends those things and they would not be able to
[Amit Varma]: cope. Whereas, if you look at all the great Indian cricketers of that time, they were
[Amit Varma]: and this was a point Harsha made, that they embodied middle class values, in a sense.
[Amit Varma]: So your Tendulkar, your Dravid, your Laxman, even Ganguly, sort of embodied those middle
[Amit Varma]: class values and therefore, they were less likely to just flame away and fall apart and
[Amit Varma]: all of that. And later, I think what happened post IPL and what you see in the current day
[Amit Varma]: is that they are so exposed to sort of top quality cricket at the IPL level, that by
[Amit Varma]: the time somebody actually plays for India, they've played many of the best players in
[Amit Varma]: the world already in packed stadiums full of screaming people. So there's no pressure
[Amit Varma]: to them, which is why, you know, we could do what we did in Australia last year, where,
[Amit Varma]: you know, our third string 11, as it were, you know, won the series for us. Now, a couple
[Amit Varma]: of points that, you know, sort of emerged from what you were saying. And when I was
[Amit Varma]: speaking about sporting culture, I was talking about a broader sporting culture, not just
[Amit Varma]: in terms of parents supporting the kids when, if they want to do sports, but just the parents
[Amit Varma]: going out and playing themselves on a Sunday afternoon when they're free.
[Guest]: Oh yeah, absolutely, Amit. I mean, not even parents. This happened with me a few years
[Guest]: ago. I really enjoy skating as a pastime. It's something, it's probably the first sport
[Guest]: that I sort of started learning, but not taught by anybody, just watching people skate on
[Guest]: the streets and then get my skates and then skate on top of the take D in Pune, by the
[Guest]: way. So it's something I've always enjoyed doing as a pastime. And I was fortunate enough
[Guest]: to live in Dubai for a couple of years. And at that time, I bought myself a pair of skates.
[Guest]: This was in 2015. And then I used to go skating on the beach with my friends and stuff. And
[Guest]: then I got my skates back to India when I came back and I still wanted to skate. And
[Guest]: I'm not a very early morning person, which is why I'm also not a very huge fan of running
[Guest]: because everybody starts at four and five in the morning. But I did not want to do that
[Guest]: with skating. If I wanted to find good roads and go skating, I didn't want to wake up at
[Guest]: five or 5.30 in the morning and go skating. So I went to a club in Pune and they have
[Guest]: a lovely skating school and great facilities. And I was like, Hey, I want to just, I have
[Guest]: skates. I'm not a very professional skater, but I would like to use the facilities. And
[Guest]: they said, No, but we do not have these free hours where you can just come and skate. You
[Guest]: would have to join a class. And I said, Okay, why not? I've never really learned skating,
[Guest]: so I don't mind it. And then I said, But what, what batch are you going to take me in? And
[Guest]: then they were like, No, but you're already you're you're an adult. So we will take you
[Guest]: in with our senior batches. And I was like, Okay. And then I went on that day. And the
[Guest]: senior batches were full of 12 year olds and 11 year olds. And I was like, Hey, listen,
[Guest]: this is not going to work out. And so I basically couldn't skate. I couldn't find a place in
[Guest]: Pune where adults went skating. Or I would say the only place where you see adults really
[Guest]: pushing themselves and getting into it is badminton courts in India. So if they are
[Guest]: not experiencing the sport and the benefit of it and the goodness of it, and if they
[Guest]: are not part of the sporting conversations, how do you expect them to as parents do it
[Guest]: for their children? So absolutely, I don't, it's, you're right, when you when we talk
[Guest]: about the sporting culture, it's the adults in India who themselves drop out and do not
[Guest]: consider themselves competitive anymore, which is also a problem.
[Amit Varma]: And also, I think that, you know, the the field of possibilities for someone discovering
[Amit Varma]: that they're good in sport as a kid is limited when that sporting culture isn't there, because
[Amit Varma]: it's not a natural thing that Sunday court time and the whole family goes out and plays
[Amit Varma]: or you know, whenever the kid has free time, the kid goes out and play. I'm sure in most
[Amit Varma]: of India, many more kids are sitting in with their phones or their laptops or doing other
[Amit Varma]: stuff rather than actually playing a sport. And the proportion for that would be greater
[Amit Varma]: than elsewhere. So we're probably losing a lot of quality sports people because of that
[Amit Varma]: because they never discovered that they love the sport or want to play it because they
[Amit Varma]: never really get into it in the first place. And equally apart from the culture itself,
[Amit Varma]: I guess incentives matter a great deal. Like the reason we have this cricket renaissance
[Amit Varma]: with so much strength and so much depth is really because the IPL changed the incentives
[Amit Varma]: and now you don't just have, so a kid in Delhi isn't just thinking that shit, I have to
[Amit Varma]: get into the Delhi team, there's one buyer for my services and there's so much corruption
[Amit Varma]: and all of that. But now there are so many teams competing for you. And I guess, you
[Amit Varma]: know, Joy Bhattacharya's Volleyball League, which we were speaking about would hopefully
[Amit Varma]: do the similar kind of thing in volleyball. So I guess those incentives also sort of matter.
[Amit Varma]: But we'll come to that. Let's talk about your journey in sport. Like how did you start getting
[Amit Varma]: into sport? Because just given who your parents were and all of that, one would imagine you'd
[Amit Varma]: be into arts and you'd be acting in plays and you'd be, you know, learning Bharatnatyam
[Guest]: and singing things. I did learn Bharatnatyam. No, I think I was always exposed to the arts
[Guest]: and I always enjoyed them. And I was always taking part in elocution and singing competitions
[Guest]: in school. And so I was pretty much into arts. But my inclination was always towards sport.
[Guest]: And that's another thing that I always feel that there is, you know, there's no element
[Guest]: of discovering what somebody's interest. You would be able to see it and you would see
[Guest]: it at the very nascent phases of somebody's growing up years. So you don't really have
[Guest]: to, you know, find out. And now I sometimes feel there's all kinds of tests to find out
[Guest]: what our interests are, what our skills are, what our thought processes are like. But most
[Guest]: often than not, your core beliefs, your core skills, your core abilities are shown at some
[Guest]: point. And for me, it was the same. So in school, like I was just, I mean, I'll take
[Guest]: you back to the skating story. So when I was about seven, eight or nine years, my friends
[Guest]: and I from my building, we used to carry our skates up the Tekdi, which is a hill in Pune.
[Guest]: And it was about just 10 minutes from where we lived. And I don't remember how often we
[Guest]: used to go, but very often. And we used to carry them up the hill, which took us about
[Guest]: 15 minutes to climb. Because the ARAI, which is a company that was nestled in the hills,
[Guest]: used to test cars before they were launched commercially. And because they tested those
[Guest]: cars, the road up the hill that led to ARAI building was always very well maintained.
[Guest]: And only the cars that were being tested or the employees of ARAI would use that road.
[Guest]: And so all kinds of skating lessons used to happen early in the morning on this road.
[Guest]: And my friends and I, we used to go up early and we used to get our skates on and we used
[Guest]: to compete with the guys who were getting trained by a coach. So they would start and
[Guest]: they would skate and we would be parallelly skating with them and we would try and compete
[Guest]: and try and beat them. And their coach was not really teaching us, but we were competing
[Guest]: with them and we got better at it at some point. So I guess that's the first time I
[Guest]: sort of did any sort of sport. And I have to thank my parents to somehow have agreed
[Guest]: to get me a pair of skates. But even in school, right from your spoon and lemon races to your
[Guest]: gunny bag races or whatever, I was always very competitive in them from the age of six
[Guest]: and seven in my first standard. I have sort of flashes of some of those races as well.
[Guest]: Even now, now I'm way past my 30s, but the times that you really overcame and you won,
[Guest]: those flashes are still very clear in my mind, even if they were like these little races.
[Guest]: And then of course, as you grow up, as you come to your fourth standard or so, you start
[Guest]: participating in inter-school dodgeball and other things. And by then the school has seen
[Guest]: that, okay, there are a few girls that are very active in sports, so they would take
[Guest]: you into those dodgeball teams. And then in my case, in the fifth standard, my school
[Guest]: decided to create a girls volleyball team. And we did not have a volleyball coach. So
[Guest]: one of our sports coaches in school was sent on some training program where he had to learn
[Guest]: and then come back and form a volleyball team. At that time, I was among the taller girls
[Guest]: in class and I had been playing in the inter-school matches in the previous years and all of that.
[Guest]: So he gathered a team and then he started training us. It wasn't really like, oh, I
[Guest]: love volleyball, so I'm going to join this sport. It wasn't like that. And we just started
[Guest]: practicing volleyball in school with Sanjay sir, who remains my biggest influence or guru
[Guest]: in terms of sport. Then the team that he collected, we became very good friends. And we just enjoyed
[Guest]: going to the school in the evening and practicing together and just being friends as such. And
[Guest]: then you know, then you participate in the city tournaments. Then you learn, oh, after
[Guest]: the city tournaments, there's further levels up all the way up until nationals. And then
[Guest]: if you are inherently competitive people and you are also part of a sports team, you obviously
[Guest]: slowly and steadily start aiming for higher and better. And yeah, so that just sort of
[Guest]: continued with me and we started enjoying the game, having a lot of success. So my school
[Guest]: volleyball team was the number one team in Pune that always won the city tournaments
[Guest]: and then reached all the way up to the state level. And then there is another school in
[Guest]: Pune called Symbiosis. The boys team of that school was always the winners at the city
[Guest]: level. So we wanted to maintain legacy at some point. So that's how it continued.
[Amit Varma]: And when you would skate with these boys, would you beat them?
[Guest]: I don't remember now. I think I would. But you know, it's really funny. I honestly believe
[Guest]: that nothing you've ever done in your life goes waste. I do not remember if I used to
[Guest]: beat them. I remember I was very good. But many years later, when I was 22 or 23, like
[Guest]: I said, I studied petroleum engineering and I joined Shell afterwards. And we had an onboarding
[Guest]: program in Oman. The onboarding program, of course, had recruits like, you know, new recruits
[Guest]: from everywhere in the world. And there was this team building activity and it was an
[Guest]: amazing race. So we had to go from Muscat, take a car with our teammates and try and
[Guest]: do quite a few activities on our way to another town where we had to finally assemble and
[Guest]: make a scrapbook. And one of the challenge activities was that the entire team should
[Guest]: be on an ice skating ring and nobody falls. And all seven of us should be there without
[Guest]: holding anybody's hands. And I had never done ice skating before that. And the Omanis
[Guest]: with me, for them, they had seen the ice skating ring before. It's quite a popular sport and
[Guest]: they had done it. And when I finally wore the ice skates, and I had never even worn,
[Guest]: I used to do roller skating. I hadn't even worn the inline skates before. And it took
[Guest]: me just 15 minutes to get the hang of it. And I was like, yeah, I'm ready. Let's let's
[Guest]: take this picture. And then now I'm a huge fan of ice skating. So after Tehkadi, I had
[Guest]: never touched skates until that day in Oman. But I could get get on to the ice skating
[Guest]: ring only because I knew originally how skating worked. So that's that's honestly, I really
[Guest]: believe that no matter what happens, give whatever opportunity you have to try something
[Guest]: new a chance, because you don't know where you're going to need it.
[Amit Varma]: This is such a fabulous story. You know, when you started talking about Oman and you're
[Amit Varma]: 22, and you're in this new company, I thought there's going to be some angle about how this
[Amit Varma]: another boy from Pune who remembers you because you used to beat him in skating down the hill
[Amit Varma]: and you know, very filmy kind of.
[Guest]: Yeah, no, I hope I don't I don't have any such enemies that I've created when I was
[Guest]: seven and eight years old. Come back to haunt me now.
[Amit Varma]: Not even enemies, someone who could have fallen for you, maybe, you know, who knows, who knows
[Amit Varma]: nice arc for a Bollywood-y sort of story right there. So what was the experience like of
[Amit Varma]: sort of going and playing at the interschool level? Because, you know, earlier, you spoke
[Amit Varma]: about how your friend in the US was, you know, sporting event coincided with exam and these
[Amit Varma]: people, you know, the people said go and play. And I remember when I was in the 11th or 12th
[Amit Varma]: in Ferguson, I forget which, I qualified for the Maharashtra team for the interschool chess
[Amit Varma]: championships. And I came third in Maharashtra and Sholapur. And then ultimately, the event,
[Amit Varma]: the interschool event coincided with the ICSE exams or something, or HSC exams or whatever
[Amit Varma]: it was. So I had to miss it. And I presume most of the people who qualified had to miss
[Amit Varma]: it. And it was just so bizarre. But what I remember about the qualification at Sholapur
[Amit Varma]: was it was an interschool event. So it wasn't only chess, right? So but my chess team from
[Amit Varma]: Pune was about four of us. And we land up there and all the other sports are there,
[Amit Varma]: there's, you know, all your wrestling and running and all of those. And some 150 of
[Amit Varma]: us were then asked to sleep in this large hall, which would, we've all been there. Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: So we had to somehow lie down on the floor, like side by side and cheek to jowl and all
[Amit Varma]: of that. And part of the floor was wet and all of that. And in the morning, there was
[Amit Varma]: just these two outdoor toilets, which you had to compete for. And we were chess players.
[Amit Varma]: There are wrestlers and judokas and all of that. So what chance do we do we have to do
[Amit Varma]: our ablutions in peace? And that was kind of what it was. And I thought, my God, what
[Amit Varma]: a massive disincentive, you know, and this was a late 80s, right? So the thing is, no
[Amit Varma]: wonder I didn't have like, I kind of retired from chess at 19. Because I figured that look
[Amit Varma]: in India, the way it is, you know, if I wasn't Vishwanathan Anand, I was nobody. And of course,
[Amit Varma]: I wasn't that good. Though one of the kids I used to play with went on to become a grandmaster
[Amit Varma]: and a national champion and all of that. But it just wasn't rational for me to stay on
[Amit Varma]: in that particular sport, whether or not one calls it a sport. And for other people from
[Amit Varma]: people from, say, a different economic strata, there might still have been the incentive
[Amit Varma]: that you'll get a job with services or railways or whatever. But otherwise, if for someone
[Amit Varma]: like me, it just didn't make sense. You know, there's a famous story of Sunil Gavaskar.
[Amit Varma]: This was, of course, in the late 60s, when he used to play for Bombay University. And
[Amit Varma]: there was a guy called, I think, Ramesh Nagdev, who used to open with him, who was a swashbuckling
[Amit Varma]: stroke player. And everybody was as impressed with him as by Gavaskar. But Nagdev went abroad
[Amit Varma]: to do degree and job and all of that and completely understandable. And I would imagine things
[Amit Varma]: are different now. But what were they like in your time? And especially, you're a group
[Amit Varma]: of girls, right? So when you travel, what is it like? How do you, you know, how do the
[Amit Varma]: authorities treat you? You know, are you always sort of fighting against the odds to do what
[Amit Varma]: you do?
[Guest]: Yeah, so Amit, first and foremost, I know a lot of these sports biopics touch upon the
[Guest]: gender biases and patriarchy in sport and all of that. But to be honest, I haven't seen
[Guest]: a lot of that for the main reason being that volleyball itself needed being propped up
[Guest]: in the first place. Then comes any gender bias and whether the boys teams were treated
[Guest]: better than women or anything like that. So I cannot really comment on that. I haven't
[Guest]: seen that in volleyball. But of course, as a women's team, we were careful. Yeah, surely
[Guest]: like our coach would tell us, oh, you have to wear your track suit all the time and just
[Guest]: be on in your team t-shirt and shorts on the court just before the match and for the warm
[Guest]: up. But that's fine. They were just being careful. In my many years of playing volleyball
[Guest]: and the great thing about having become a volleyball player was that most of the volleyball
[Guest]: matches used to happen in very small towns in Maharashtra because I think the idea was
[Guest]: to uplift those towns. So if you really ask me if I have traveled to some of the best
[Guest]: parts of Maharashtra and tourist destinations, I haven't been. But if you ask me where else
[Guest]: I've been in Maharashtra, almost all small towns. I've been to places like Barshi, Solapur,
[Guest]: Beed, Varna Nagar, Bilawdi. Who talks about these towns? Even when we were playing chess,
[Guest]: we went to Solapur, Sangli, Kolhapur, Aurangabad, Satara, Banhala, Kolhapur, Aurangabad, Ahmednagar,
[Guest]: Daund, which is closer from here. And, you know, I have literally traveled everywhere
[Guest]: in Maharashtra. I have seen every dirty toilet there is to see, basically. And I mean, I've
[Guest]: tried water from all of these towns. And now when I travel as well, I think what I've picked
[Guest]: up from there is I don't notice the change in taste of the water. I'm not always complaining.
[Guest]: Even now when I go and travel somewhere, I'm not looking for bistleries. I think your body
[Guest]: just adjusts at some point. And I think that really made us very, very independent as women.
[Guest]: Like you said, all these sports facilities that would be offered to sports teams at the
[Guest]: time would basically be one of the rooms from a government school with Shahbad tiles and
[Guest]: those iron nets on the top. And basically, it's really funny because you would start
[Guest]: by cleaning that room. And the magical thing about Shahbad tiles is no matter how much
[Guest]: you try to clean them, you cannot succeed. So you end up sleeping on whatever you're
[Guest]: carrying, whatever bedding you're carrying. And I think that kind of brings you together
[Guest]: in some ways, because now I'm still close with all my original volleyball team from
[Guest]: school and we really laugh about these things. And that's why, you know, movies like Chakde
[Guest]: really sort of strike a chord with us because they've kind of gotten closer to the living
[Guest]: conditions and all those things. It's quite nostalgic in that sense for us. But in terms
[Guest]: of the levels of the game that you mentioned earlier on, so how it used to happen with
[Guest]: volleyball is there used to be a city level tournament. So let's say I'm from Pune, all
[Guest]: the girls teams from Pune play. Then the team that wins plays the district level tournament.
[Guest]: And then all the teams from the districts play and then you play the divisions and you
[Guest]: play as a team. Then the team that wins at the divisions plays the state level tournament.
[Guest]: And then that's pretty much as high as you can go as a team. And then after that, a few
[Guest]: of the players that are selected during the state level tournaments enter the national
[Guest]: level selection trials. And from there, the national level team is then selected. Yeah,
[Guest]: it's pretty much that whole journey by the time you actually end up playing the nationals.
[Guest]: And you were saying that a lot of people drop out because they didn't see opportunities
[Guest]: after maybe attaining, you know, getting to this level, which is true, which is what it
[Guest]: was during my time as well. And regardless of how well I did or not, at some point I
[Guest]: would have dropped out. But for me, I attribute all of my life success so far to a specific
[Guest]: event that happened during my 10th exams. And it was to do with volleyball. And what
[Guest]: had happened is that you were just mentioning that your CBSE exam, HSC I think since I was
[Guest]: in Ferguson. Yeah, yeah, yeah. So your 12th exam was was closed. And so a lot of people
[Guest]: drop out. I had that situation when I was in the 10th standard. So my 10th final exam
[Guest]: was at the end of March or so. And at the end of January, we received a invite for the
[Guest]: nationals trials. And while I had started playing when I was in the sixth standard,
[Guest]: I had played a lot of state level tournaments, but then every sportsman wants to play that
[Guest]: national level. And so you are literally waiting and you have really seen a lot of your colleagues
[Guest]: and everybody, you know, get selected over the years and you're, you're like, hey, this
[Guest]: is, you know, this is something I really want to do. A lot of people at that time would
[Guest]: be like, hey, I'm not going to go anymore, because my 10th exam is coming, coming is
[Guest]: really close. And I decided to go and I have to thank my parents that they have never,
[Guest]: never ever pushed me to be academically very ahead of the game or so. I decided to go it
[Guest]: was the trials were in Solapur and I got selected. And then there was a seven day camp before
[Guest]: the team left for Hyderabad. And I used to play a position called as a tosser. So if
[Guest]: the volleyball team has 12 players, six reserve and six mains, there are only two tossers.
[Guest]: So they are like the game makers, the ones who stand near the net, and they are the ones
[Guest]: who toss the ball to the smashers. So we are the ones who are deciding how the game is
[Guest]: played because we decide the strategy on which smasher will play, whether behind us, ahead
[Guest]: of us, far back of the court. So in that sense, we are the game makers, but there are only
[Guest]: two positions in the team. And so I was selected and after the camp, there was a girl who was,
[Guest]: I think was more experienced than me who came from Nagpur. And her father, I think paid
[Guest]: the coach at the time, some 5 or 10,000 rupees or so and to get me out of the team and let
[Guest]: her play. And that's what happened. And because the national team was announced, this was
[Guest]: not during the trials. It was shocking. And this was corruption. And I don't think there's
[Guest]: any sportsman in India who's not seen corruption. And I was absolutely shocked. If there was
[Guest]: any time I have hoped that my parents had any connections to reverse this decision,
[Guest]: it was that time. And of course, we didn't. So we couldn't do anything about it. And my
[Guest]: aunt stays in Sulapur. So she came to get me. And then, of course, there was a lot of
[Guest]: crying and how can this happen to me and all of that. But then I came back to Pune. And
[Guest]: I remember that Sulapur to Pune was about 4 or 5 hours of drive. And the first 2-3 hours
[Guest]: was literally like, I left my exams and I jeopardized my exams and spent so long here.
[Guest]: And if it was just the trials, it was 2-3 days. But now I've finished the camp. How
[Guest]: could they do this to me? 10 days of my study time is just gone. And I mean, what happened
[Guest]: with me was wrong. But it wasn't like by that time, I was doing something amazing in terms
[Guest]: of my studies in school. I wasn't some topper or top 10 or whatever. I was probably scoring
[Guest]: like mid-70s and not too bothered about it. But in that 5-hour journey, I don't know what
[Guest]: happened to me. I was like, I cannot fail. If this is what's going to happen to me, I'm
[Guest]: going to kill it in my exams. It was just like a switch in my mind. I had no prior data
[Guest]: to prove that I could kill it in my exams basically. But it was just the competitive
[Guest]: spirit that there has to be a win at the end of this. So I came back home and I sort of
[Guest]: made a study plan. I had about a month left before my exams. My dream was to get into
[Guest]: Ferguson College because everybody's is in Pune and it's the best college. And I knew
[Guest]: I wanted science and it's the best college for science. Closes at a high percentage.
[Guest]: And I was like, okay, this is my goal. I wrote it on a piece of paper. I stuck it on the
[Guest]: wall. I made a schedule, etc. I think that one month I must have studied 18 hours every
[Guest]: day. I don't think I have focused as much in my entire life. And I scored some 84-85%.
[Guest]: I was well within Ferguson's range and I was admitted to Ferguson. And I was the only one
[Guest]: amongst my friends circle at the time who actually got into Ferguson because I had scored
[Guest]: well enough. And I had not seen such academic success or my own potential in academics so
[Guest]: far at that level. I surprised myself. So from that day onwards, I have never thought
[Guest]: that any failure that came in my life was a personal failure that I couldn't better.
[Guest]: I guess that event became a turning point in my life. It's unfortunate when corruption
[Guest]: happens in sport and I'm sure a lot of players get disappointed with it. I guess I always
[Guest]: knew that I was going to drop out of the sport in that sense. But to drop, to sort of get
[Guest]: this out of that negative incident that happened in my life allowed me to stay competitive
[Guest]: my entire life. So once you have gotten into Ferguson, you're again in a pool of very competitive
[Guest]: people or very talented people, good academically, whatever. Then you continue, you've seen success,
[Guest]: so now you don't want to do any less than what you have. And that then just continues
[Guest]: and becomes your new normal. I think that for me it worked to have faced that thing.
[Guest]: And then later that year, I had another chance to go to the nationals trials. I got selected,
[Guest]: I played the nationals. So in that sense, the circle was completed. But I would say
[Guest]: that by the time I actually played my nationals, I think I had what I really wanted. So yeah,
[Guest]: I guess you convert your failures into something that works for you or sort of reveal what
[Guest]: you already had in terms of your desires. So that's my story in terms of...
[Amit Varma]: That's an amazing story and so many shades to it, which I'll come at. But the girl who
[Guest]: took your place, did you speak to her? What was that like?
[Guest]: I don't think I spoke to her. No, I didn't see her again.
[Amit Varma]: You didn't see her again?
[Amit Varma]: No.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I wonder where she is today. Yeah, no, that's an amazing story. And I want to ask
[Amit Varma]: you therefore about a couple of C words. And one is camaraderie, which you know, you referred
[Amit Varma]: to how you became so close to all the girls in your volleyball team and all of that. And
[Amit Varma]: the other is competitiveness. And competitiveness, to me, in many ways, seems like a double edged
[Amit Varma]: sword. And I say this from experience, because I can also be competitive in different ways,
[Amit Varma]: though never really in sports unless you call chess a sport. But you know, on the one hand,
[Amit Varma]: it drives you to do better and better and better because you want to beat someone or
[Amit Varma]: you want to do better than someone and so on and so forth. But on the other hand, it
[Amit Varma]: can also sort of corrode your character in the sense that you begin to think of the world
[Amit Varma]: as a zero sum game. You know, because that's automatic. Sport is zero sum, society is not.
[Amit Varma]: You don't have to beat anyone in society to get ahead. It's just the other way around.
[Amit Varma]: It's a positive something. But sport is zero sum, you have to win, you know, and if you
[Amit Varma]: win, well, if you humiliate the other person while you're at it, right, you just while
[Amit Varma]: you're playing against them, you just want to destroy them, as it were. And it seems
[Amit Varma]: to me that there is a certain amount of negative emotion that kind of gets in there. And this
[Amit Varma]: is both at perhaps a personal level in terms of what it does to you as a person. And this
[Amit Varma]: is also at a wider level, it can bring out our worst tribal instincts, like when it's
[Amit Varma]: between countries, it's like Orville said, war minus the shooting. And we can come to
[Amit Varma]: camaraderie after this. But to just speak about competitiveness, what is your sense
[Amit Varma]: of the competitive person in you? Because on the one hand, it seems that when you go
[Amit Varma]: for that volleyball tournament, what you really want at that moment is to play the Nationals.
[Amit Varma]: And when this incident happens that you're not in the team, you change wanting that to
[Amit Varma]: wanting to murder the exam, so you can get into Ferguson. And all you have done is you've
[Amit Varma]: shifted your locus of competition. And at some level, one could even say, and I'm not
[Amit Varma]: saying this about you, I've thought about this for myself, that when I have been competitive,
[Amit Varma]: and I have tried to win, is it just about ego? Is that what is kind of driving it? You
[Amit Varma]: know, that kind of a sense. And so that always interests me, because on the one hand, I think
[Amit Varma]: it's important to be competitive. On the other hand, I find that more and more, I find myself
[Amit Varma]: suppressing that instinct. You know, like now, the one way in which I simply like, you
[Amit Varma]: know, people will ask me about other podcasts, how are their podcasts doing? How are your
[Amit Varma]: podcasts doing? You know, so and so is such a star on YouTube. And for me, I'm not thinking
[Amit Varma]: about that. Because on the one hand, I can rationalize it and say, I'm trying to do something
[Amit Varma]: so different that, you know, I'm kind of alone in that space. And I'm just doing it for myself.
[Amit Varma]: And you can't really compete, which is the right way to think about it. But there is
[Amit Varma]: always that competitive instinct. And I try to fight that in myself more than I let it
[Amit Varma]: sort of drive me and take me to another level. So what is your relationship with your competitiveness?
[Guest]: Yeah. So, Amit, before I come to your question, I want to sort of say that over time, we've
[Guest]: demonized this word competition. And sometimes we repeat it in in that very emotion. And
[Guest]: then it becomes that emotion. And I think if we talk about the bad things of being competitive,
[Guest]: we have also have to talk about the other side of the coin. And I mean, I'm going to
[Guest]: be abstract here, because you asked me what my thoughts are. And I feel like we have so
[Guest]: many words describing so many emotions, but I can't think of many words that describe
[Guest]: competition, the joys of competition. And I don't know if you've heard the song Allah
[Guest]: Ke Bande, there's a line in that song. And the line is basically, it's talking about
[Guest]: a bird, the song that a bird that's sort of falling down. And it says, Girta hua wo asma
[Guest]: se, aakar gira zameen par, khabo mein fir bhi badal hi the, wo kehta raha magar. So,
[Guest]: that is competition for me. Now, in this case, here's somebody who's faced failure and fallen
[Guest]: flat on their face. Now, if they are, they are on the ground and yet thinking of their
[Guest]: best days, then at some point, they want to get there and that is competition with the
[Guest]: self. Competition does not always have to be with an opponent. It doesn't always have
[Guest]: to be with another team. It doesn't always have to be with your class. For me, competition,
[Guest]: yeah, sure, if I'm playing a sport, like Martina Navratilova said about sport, she said something
[Guest]: like, those who say that winning is not always important, probably lost. And that's true
[Guest]: with sport, you know, because why are you on the, on the court, if you're not there
[Guest]: to win. And by winning, it means if you're not there to give your best, if you gave your
[Guest]: best and somebody bested you, then accept it and come back. But for me, competition
[Guest]: is also about bettering myself, about understanding competition as a concept. Think about Usain
[Guest]: Bolt, for example. How did he know that his 9 seconds plus something timing was the best
[Guest]: in the world? Because some other people competed. He went on to beat his own record. That's
[Guest]: a different story. That's a competition he was in with himself. But if other people were
[Guest]: not running, he would not know that this 9 second was something amazing. So that's how
[Guest]: I really look at competition that others allowing me to know what my limits are. That is competition
[Guest]: for me. Because if I was running all by myself, in whatever I'm doing, I would not know if
[Guest]: I'm really doing my best. Or there are people doing much better than me. Are they doing
[Guest]: much better than me or they're at my level? How do you know that? So that's my only definition
[Guest]: of competition. Apart from that, I use my competitive spirit when I'm failing miserably.
[Guest]: Because you really need to find something to pick yourself up. And apart from that as
[Guest]: well, I think you need to, if you're really getting all the experiences and absorbing
[Guest]: everything that the sport or whatever you are trying to improve is teaching you. If
[Guest]: you're really introspecting what a certain experience, a certain match, a certain competition
[Guest]: has taught you, travelling with your team has taught you. If you're absorbing that,
[Guest]: you're growing as a person and learning to put competition in perspective. So I am not
[Guest]: a voracious reader, but I'm very good at picking random things that somebody is saying
[Guest]: in a certain context and using it in some other context. And I was recently watching
[Guest]: some funny video by Kusha Kapila and she had a very funny take on a teacher is talking
[Guest]: to a parent. And the teacher is trying to advise the parent that, ye kitabe waghra hai
[Guest]: class ki ye isko padni chahiye, to B plus to aa jayega. And obviously it's an Indian
[Guest]: parent, so the Indian parent asks, lekin A plus ke liye kya karna padega? And then the
[Guest]: teacher says, nahi A plus wala toh aapka bacha hi nahi hai. So I am like that, I know where
[Guest]: I'm not A plus. So I'm not trying to compete in that zone. I think it's self-awareness
[Guest]: in that sense. So when it comes to competition, I'm able to distinguish where I can be competitive
[Guest]: and where I cannot be competitive. And I'm not trying to be competitive in places where
[Guest]: I know I'm going to be disappointed. That's some sort of self-awareness for me. And so
[Guest]: it doesn't become toxic for me, that I'm trying and trying and trying and not doing better
[Guest]: at all. I don't get into that zone. But because I worked for Shell after my engineering, and
[Guest]: at that time Shell was only recruiting from the IITs. And apart from that, they were recruiting
[Guest]: from MIT Pune's petroleum branch because it was in the top two in India at that time after
[Guest]: ISM Dhanbad. So we were the only non-IITians who were joining the small batches of engineers
[Guest]: that Shell was taking at the time. So I have spent eight years in Shell only working with
[Guest]: IITians. And if I did not have competitive spirit, I could not have survived that environment
[Guest]: because they are not only intelligent, but very, very, very hardworking and very competitive.
[Guest]: So I guess the only way I could have survived in that environment was with my competitive
[Guest]: spirit. And I have seen the negative sides of competition as well. Because if there are
[Guest]: people who are not able to separate things in their life where they are not competing,
[Guest]: where they want peace, where they want growth, but not in a very professional sense, if they
[Guest]: are not able to separate that, then it can make them miserable. No matter the amount
[Guest]: of money you're getting, no matter the amount of wealth you're accumulating, experiences
[Guest]: you're accumulating, your mind is constantly thinking about the same thing. That my colleague
[Guest]: is doing better than me, has gotten a better yearly performance or whatever. And over time
[Guest]: that just makes you a very, very unevolved person in a sense. You're also looking at
[Guest]: other individuals from the same lens. And I think that's where I would say one should
[Guest]: stop and think. So I would say competition, if you use as a concept in your life, then
[Guest]: you will be able to choose where you want to really put all your time and effort, and
[Guest]: where you are not competitive enough, and where you need to do just enough. Because
[Guest]: there are some places where you need to do just enough to survive. Yeah, and honestly,
[Guest]: if I look at it, I don't find it toxic. If you constantly look inwards, if you're constantly
[Guest]: looking outwards, then you are basically comparing yourself with things that are out of your
[Guest]: circle of influence, and then trying to be competitive with those things. And it's really
[Amit Varma]: like being a fish trying to climb a tree then. Yeah, that's well put. And the thing is, most
[Amit Varma]: people aren't given to self-reflection. So in that sense, they can get trapped in that.
[Amit Varma]: And I'll just think aloud here. One concept you might have heard me exploring with some
[Amit Varma]: of my recent guests has been something I picked up from Luke Burgess's book, Wanting, of thick
[Amit Varma]: and thin desires. And the way he defines it is that thick desires are what you really
[Amit Varma]: inherently want to do. You're not doing it because somebody else is or because you feel
[Amit Varma]: that's the kind of thing you should do. And thin desires are desires that are often mimetic
[Amit Varma]: desires or desires that you see them as desires in the environment around you, so you pick
[Amit Varma]: them up, but you don't really, really want them. So, you know, if I want a new Mercedes
[Amit Varma]: C-Class, that could be a thin desire. Or if a kid growing up today says, Oh, I want to
[Amit Varma]: get married and have kids, that could be a thin desire, because you just see that as
[Amit Varma]: a default thing to want over there. And over time, I think people need to kind of figure
[Amit Varma]: out what their thick and thin desires are, especially because your most intense desires
[Amit Varma]: at a moment in time could actually be thin desires. And I'm thinking aloud and thinking
[Amit Varma]: about how sometimes, you know, in your story of shifting that competitiveness from volleyball,
[Amit Varma]: once you fail to make the team to your exams, you know, one way to look at it is that both
[Amit Varma]: of those could have been thin desires, or maybe volleyball could have been thick and
[Amit Varma]: then you transferred it. But another way and I'm thinking aloud, is that the thick desire
[Amit Varma]: perhaps was to compete because it would be in your nature to compete and therefore the
[Amit Varma]: thick desire is to always compete. And it doesn't matter so much what you're competing
[Amit Varma]: in just the very act of competing and doing your best both improves you in that domain
[Amit Varma]: and also builds your character because and all those other things of discipline and working
[Amit Varma]: hard and self reflection even because that is how you improve often kind of come with
[Guest]: it. So what are your sort of thoughts? I think for me, Amit, it has come out of ambition.
[Guest]: This competitiveness is not my base level, or my everyday level. If you if I speak about
[Guest]: me, there are people who are competitive 24 hours. I'm not those type of people, but I'm
[Guest]: ambitious. And when I say ambitious, I'm not saying I want to be the next Jeff Bezos. And,
[Guest]: you know, when we talk about ambition, also, we are talking about I want to be Roger Federer,
[Guest]: I want to be Serena Williams, or Jeff Bezos. I'm, I'm saying my own ambition, my own best
[Guest]: that I can achieve. And in my mind, there's a sort of a mind map, that these are the few
[Guest]: things that have to happen if I have to get there. And if I am at this moment, tackling
[Guest]: a big milestone on that mind map, which is in my mind, then I will be very competitive.
[Guest]: But let's say I'm between milestones, and there are a few things that have to happen,
[Guest]: but they are okay, they, you know, okay milestones, then I'm not my best, most competitive at
[Guest]: that time. So for me, that's why I know it is it's it's coming out of ambition and not
[Guest]: out of not out of constantly enjoying competition. And in that sense, I get a lot of mental break
[Guest]: as well between being very, very competitive and not being competitive. So to give you
[Guest]: an example, to apply for my MBA last year, for example, it was so last year was the worst
[Guest]: year to apply for an MBA program, because the entire world was applying because a lot
[Guest]: of people had lost their jobs. And so it was a very, very competitive year to apply for
[Guest]: a program. And so that naturally meant that you had to ace your entrance exam, which is
[Guest]: which is the GMAT and you needed to be higher than you would have otherwise been because
[Guest]: you have to stand out plus we are all applying as Indians. So the colleges want to ensure
[Guest]: that there's not too many Indians in the class, so they're going to choose the best or whatever
[Guest]: applications come. So you're competing with Indians and with the world. Apart from the
[Guest]: profile that you cannot change, you've done what you have all your life. The only thing
[Guest]: that you can influence is how well you do in that exam. And so I again went into that
[Guest]: zone where I was literally studying most of my time and trying to get this exam out of
[Guest]: the way and at a level that I really wanted it. I answered it one time and it wasn't sufficient.
[Guest]: So I took another couple of months, I answered the exam again, because I knew that I would
[Guest]: not be happy with the substandard college. And once I got in to a university of my choice,
[Guest]: now if you look at me, am I very competitive in my class? I'm not. Because now I'm thinking
[Guest]: of what I want to do afterwards. Now I'm thinking, okay, if I want to do A, B and C things after
[Guest]: my MBA, do I need to be first in class for that? The answer for my future is no. So then
[Guest]: you would not see me really burn myself out. I would do everything that's required. I would
[Guest]: still be slightly competitive. I still don't want to see myself at the bottom of the pack
[Guest]: or whatever. But you would not see me really work very, very hard to be in the top five
[Guest]: or 10% because for me, logically doesn't make any sense. So I would say, hey, why should
[Guest]: I burn myself out then? I would, if I again come across somewhere, some milestone where
[Guest]: which has to happen on my path. So that for me is then ambition coming sort of together
[Guest]: with competition. But I cannot constantly be in the competitive zone.
[Amit Varma]: I think these sort of thoughtful collaborations that you're carrying out, as it were, of how
[Amit Varma]: competitive you are, come from, again, being very clear in your thinking about what you
[Amit Varma]: want and what you're optimising for, which I find many people aren't. And certainly,
[Amit Varma]: I wasn't for a large part of my life. So, you know, it's sort of something that I admire.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, to get to camaraderie, and even more than that, you'd earlier mentioned about
[Amit Varma]: how sport changed you, how, you know, all of you in that early volleyball team, you're
[Amit Varma]: still in touch, you were changed in a different context, you'd mentioned how you find yourself
[Amit Varma]: different from all the other people around you who didn't play sport at the time, all
[Amit Varma]: your friends around you. And you also sort of spoke about the influence of that early
[Amit Varma]: coach Sanjay sir and the kind of regard you held him in and all of that. And I'm guessing
[Amit Varma]: that that coaching would not, you know, you're not calling him a good coach, because he was
[Amit Varma]: a strategic genius or a tactical mastermind. There were other elements of mentorship or
[Amit Varma]: whatever that kind of came into play. So tell me a little bit about how playing sport changed
[Amit Varma]: you as a person in fundamental ways.
[Guest]: So I would want to go back, Amit, to the story which I said, you know, started my transformation.
[Guest]: First of all, when in my sixth standard or seventh standard, I was selected in that volleyball
[Guest]: team, it was a great time to feel that, hey, I was taller in class. So I got this opportunity,
[Guest]: I was chosen somewhere, whatever. When that happened, and when we started becoming friends,
[Guest]: we started valuing friendship. And that's why we started practicing together more and
[Guest]: not missing practices. And there's one thing that I've always had, that I do not like to
[Guest]: join something and then start missing it. So that was an inherent thing. Even in school,
[Guest]: I was not somebody who would bunk school very often. I was not somebody who would be unwell
[Guest]: too much. So the fact that I would like to be disciplined and show up really helped me.
[Guest]: And that camaraderie with the seniors in my school, the juniors who came afterwards, and
[Guest]: then competing together, and then going on shoestring budgets and staying in these small
[Guest]: government schools and everything just brought our experiences together, it grew us up. All
[Guest]: of us came from sort of middle class, upper middle class backgrounds, and nobody was carrying
[Guest]: a lot of money. We never, I don't remember buying a bisleri. I remember, you know, shutting
[Guest]: all the lights in the room and holding towels and then changing and helping your teammates.
[Guest]: And then those all those experiences, and I'm sure even Snehal mentioned this in your
[Guest]: podcast, Snehal Pradhan, that the one time that that your team would get a train ticket
[Guest]: with a booked berth, everybody was celebrating, it was a day that we've never seen. And I
[Guest]: had to play like six, seven years for my nationals to happen for us to get a get a train berth
[Guest]: in sleeper class on our return back to Maharashtra from MP, my nationals were in Rewa. And the
[Guest]: funny thing is that one time when we were so happy that we have a berth, because all
[Guest]: other journeys we've done are sat in front of the train toilets with all our bags. And
[Guest]: there was some sort of a protest going on. And all those guys filled our bogies, they
[Guest]: took all our berths. And we were eventually 12 of us sitting in the uppermost berth. And
[Guest]: so it's almost like it's, you know, it's destiny that till the time you're playing the sport,
[Guest]: you're never going to get a, you know, confirmed berth on a train.
[Guest]: So only your parents gave birth to you.
[Guest]: That was the only berth I got. And there's a story in that as well. So when we didn't
[Guest]: get these berths, and we had to sit on the topmost berth, there was a friend of mine,
[Guest]: who's a dear friend even now. And she was looking forward to seeing a brother of hers
[Guest]: who was going to bring pizza on a certain station where the train stopped for 10 minutes.
[Guest]: And on the 15, during the 15 days of our nationals, I think the Maharashtra team was carrying
[Guest]: a, like took a cook with them. But we always got like roti and aloo sabzi. And we were,
[Guest]: we were tired of it, like tired as in we had forgotten what food and taste was like, this
[Guest]: was December, it was very cold, none of us had seen that kind of cold. And this girl
[Guest]: was at some point went to the cook and she was like, make something else, make anything
[Guest]: else. And this guy was like, yeah, yeah, yeah. Ma'am, today we're going to make something
[Guest]: different. And then she tells everybody today we're going to get something else for dinner.
[Guest]: And then they serve us aloo sabzi and this chapati. And she's almost crying. She's just,
[Guest]: she's lost it completely. And she's like, what is different in this? You've told us
[Guest]: that you're going to make. And he's like, nahi, aaj matar dala hai iske andar. And,
[Guest]: and she was, she started crying. And then I remember, so few of us, we were like, Disha,
[Guest]: let's go, we will buy some Cadburys or something. And we were also like, we were also much younger,
[Guest]: but she was a couple of years younger than us. And then we go into these streets of Rewa
[Guest]: somewhere in the evening. And then she sees a small tapri somewhere at a distance and
[Guest]: she runs and she's maybe about 100 meters ahead of us. And she goes to that tapri and
[Guest]: she speaks to him. And then we are still walking. And then she turns around and she says loudly
[Guest]: and she's shouting from there. And she's like, this guy does not even know what a dairy milk
[Guest]: is. She was so disturbed. And so when we, when we were returning, this brother was going
[Guest]: to bring pizzas for her. And we did not have even an inch of space left. It was in the
[Guest]: entire bogie. It was full. Amit, this girl just made everybody move. She marched out
[Guest]: of the train, got the pizza, got into the train again and got upstairs, brought the
[Guest]: pizza up on the upper berth for all of us. And if you had seen, there was not, there
[Guest]: was, there were people everywhere in the train. And I have seen how, you know, I remember
[Guest]: all these moments when, you know, somebody showed you their strength or courage. Because
[Guest]: I don't know, everybody was saying that she's not going to get her pizza today. And she
[Guest]: got it and she fed everybody that day, pizza. So all those, all those things happen. And
[Guest]: then you remember all those things. And I think many years later, when I was in a situation
[Guest]: where I was traveling for work, and I was put in, put into five star hotels with like
[Guest]: the slurries and everything. And to date, every time I'm treated well, I really value
[Guest]: it. Because, because for many, many years, we did not have that. I guess that is something
[Guest]: that never goes. And, and let me know if I'm digressing from what your question is. But
[Guest]: I guess in that sense, if you ask me how my sport, how did sport change me? First of all,
[Guest]: these were the, these were the early growing up experiences that allow you to become much
[Guest]: more adjusting, but also demand for what you want. Look after your, look after your team.
[Guest]: Because again, there's benefits of being in a team sport compared to an individual sport
[Guest]: like tennis. So you look after your teammates, you learn off the court and on the court as
[Guest]: well. And that's why I keep mentioning that I love the movie Chakde, because there's so
[Guest]: much going on on the court between seniors and juniors and the politics on the court
[Guest]: itself. So you learn from all of that. But apart from that, after this whole corruption
[Guest]: incident that happened with me during 10th, I discovered that I could move, I could do
[Guest]: well academically or so. One of the tricks that I have developed to be successful in
[Guest]: smaller endeavors and in large endeavors after that is to fantasize about success. I mean,
[Guest]: it is my mantra. If I'm on the treadmill, for example, and I have decided so that's
[Guest]: another thing. And later when I got more into fitness, I used to tell this to my clients
[Guest]: as well. Do not do anything with no goal whatsoever. Don't get into onto the treadmill, just saying
[Guest]: that, hey, I'm there to walk. Either you're going to walk because you want to walk at
[Guest]: a certain speed, or you want to test out a certain incline level, or you want to walk
[Guest]: for, let's say one hour, which you've not done before. Maybe you walked 55 minutes before,
[Guest]: but now you want to walk 60 minutes, at least that's a goal. But don't tell me I'm just
[Guest]: on the treadmill. Tell me what's your goal, why are you on the treadmill? Because if I
[Guest]: wanted to make you really test yourself and really get the most out of being on the treadmill,
[Guest]: you can do that in 10 minutes also, you can do that in 60 minutes also. So don't try to
[Guest]: tell me that because you were on the treadmill for 60 minutes, listening to music and just
[Guest]: walking, you've exercised a lot. Tell me what did you achieve today? So I don't get onto
[Guest]: the treadmill if I don't have a goal. And normally I'm trying to run a 5 kilometer or
[Guest]: something on the treadmill. Like I mentioned, I'm not an early morning person, so I'd end
[Guest]: up doing some of my runs on the treadmill. And even in a 5 kilometer run, it's very challenging
[Guest]: because, even if you want to improve by half a minute or let's say 40 seconds or so, it's
[Guest]: quite an achievement. And it takes strategy. How and at what point are you going to save
[Guest]: those 40 seconds compared to your last run? And that last run couldn't have been yesterday.
[Guest]: I have to do something in between the two runs such that I can expect a 40 second less
[Guest]: timing this time. Part of that strategy is, if I can imagine, if I can fantasize about
[Guest]: a situation, I mean, sure, I will have improved the running strategy, I may have improved
[Guest]: my nutrition or I may have done a few practice runs to sprint in the middle or whatever,
[Guest]: that all strategy is there. But part of it is you are running towards, you have maybe
[Guest]: the last 5 or 7 minutes left, you're really low on energy. And at that time, you fantasize
[Guest]: about something, you fantasize that maybe somebody you absolutely love is at the end
[Guest]: of this run and is really applauding you. Somebody you or maybe a stadium is applauding
[Guest]: you. Or maybe you are fantasizing, hey, I'm going to take a picture of this treadmill
[Guest]: when that timing comes so that I can put it up on Facebook or I can put it up on Twitter.
[Guest]: So I have learned to fantasize. And that helps me. And I use that technique sometimes for
[Guest]: the short term things like I'm on the treadmill or whatever. But sometimes I will use it for
[Guest]: a longer term goal as well, like I'm studying for an exam or I'm working on my startup,
[Guest]: for example. And even startups where you're putting in your own money, you're full of
[Guest]: doubts. How do you bring in those endorphins? Sometimes you're just sat there and you're
[Guest]: like you're fantasizing that, hey, maybe 100 people in the US are using my fitness program
[Guest]: or they may be talking about it. They want to share it on Facebook or somebody sitting
[Guest]: in other cities in India is using it. So you learn to better fantasize and then use those
[Guest]: endorphins to get that last bit of success. And that's something I've got from sports
[Guest]: because you draw from an applause you had enjoyed, you draw from somebody who said something
[Guest]: nice to you after you did something. That's something I've gotten from sport. And the
[Guest]: other thing that I have mentioned before is don't take failure personally. Like if you
[Guest]: failed at something, either you were not very good at it, or circumstances didn't allow
[Guest]: you to do it. It's how you look at it, or maybe you have to take time off to understand
[Guest]: if it was just something that you will not be able to do better anymore. So it's you
[Guest]: in that case, or was it because of circumstances? And in that case, you just reattempt it if
[Guest]: you can, and this time the circumstances would be different. So for me, I have faced a lot
[Guest]: of failure at different points, but somehow I have always thought that this wasn't me.
[Guest]: Something else happened. And so when I'm going to attempt it again, I am pretty sure I'm
[Guest]: going to do well. So it happened to me in engineering as well. So there's a fairly difficult
[Guest]: paper in the first year, it's called graphics, if you remember. And I didn't do engineering,
[Guest]: so I don't remember. But yeah, so graphics and strength of materials are two topics that
[Guest]: the engineering students are quite scared of in the first year. And graphics is this
[Guest]: four hour paper where you are with your drafter, and you're trying to draw all kinds of figures
[Guest]: and 3d figures and come to answers of what angle is what or whatever, and takes fair
[Guest]: amount of visualization. Somebody has to sort of teach you how to do that. I was taking
[Guest]: a class for this paper, because everybody does, and you have quite a bit of equipment
[Guest]: with you and these big books on which you are drawing. And it was I think March or April,
[Guest]: it was very hot, and this class that I was in had some hundred students packed in a very
[Guest]: small room. And the ACs were not working. And when the class got over, I took my Activa
[Guest]: out, I had an Activa at the time, which my father had gifted me because I played this
[Guest]: national the year before. And I had a big accident. And I don't have memory of what
[Guest]: happened really, but some people tell me that I was maybe on the side of the road, and there
[Guest]: was a car parked who opened the door on the driver's side, and then it hit me and I fell
[Guest]: or something. I don't remember. And then my Activa really sort of was in a bad shape after
[Guest]: that accident. It was inactiva. It was inactiva, exactly. So because my dad had gifted me this
[Guest]: Activa after my nationals, and he had taken like a massive loan or so for it, I was very,
[Guest]: very upset. And I was then upset because this person was running these classes in such a
[Guest]: small space and putting us through this. And then my Activa was like maybe I think two
[Guest]: months old or so. So I was very emotional about it. And I was like, I'm not going to
[Guest]: his class again. And I'm going to try and study at home. And invariably, this is a subject
[Guest]: that you cannot study at home because somebody has to help you visualize things. And I failed
[Guest]: it in first year and I hadn't failed I think in any academic, in an academic situation
[Guest]: before that. And I was, I think I got the result and for some reason, I just felt that
[Guest]: hey, I know why this happened. And I'm going to answer the exam again. And there's always
[Guest]: people who will be like, oh, now what will happen to your recruitment and somebody is
[Guest]: going to see you fail this paper. And none of that bothered me because I never thought
[Guest]: that I did not understand what was going on. I had to answer that obviously in the next
[Guest]: semester again. And I probably ended up scoring one of the highest in my batch in my university.
[Guest]: Because I gave it time and I was in the frame of mind to really answer that paper once again.
[Guest]: And it turns out that I did better than I would have done the first time just to try
[Guest]: and pass that subject. So I guess that's something also I draw from sport that hey, failure can
[Guest]: happen, don't take it personally, unless you think that you cannot do it. So when I do
[Guest]: face some failure, I don't feel like it's me. I feel like maybe I didn't do well enough.
[Guest]: Maybe there are other ways of doing it. I have not really explored all those other ways.
[Guest]: So I cannot conclude that I cannot do it. I'm just taking you through how my mind would
[Guest]: think in those situations. And then I guess one of the very short points that I would
[Guest]: like to make about sport is that I don't think sport builds character. I do not think it
[Guest]: builds character. You just have the character that you have. It can maybe sharpen it in
[Guest]: some ways because it allows you a lot more experiences to sort of introspect and then
[Guest]: carry forward. But your character is what it is. And in sport as well, I have seen,
[Guest]: for example, there was a girl that was a very good volleyball player. And she was much more
[Guest]: senior to me. And I'm not going to name her, but she was always a gunda. She was always
[Guest]: a gunda. And everybody was scared of her. And she was always, you would imagine, ends
[Guest]: up backing people or, you know, getting violent. And she later ended up joining MNS as well.
[Guest]: And she was, she was leading the youth wing. So you could tell when you were with her during
[Guest]: the game. But she was a brilliant volleyball player. And we always knew that when we heard
[Guest]: that this is what she's doing now, none of us were surprised. So at the same time, somehow
[Guest]: my sports team, my immediate team, we were all the academic types. So most of us ended
[Guest]: up playing nationals eventually. Some ended up sort of getting to the internationals trials
[Guest]: and things. But again, we ended up being academically, we did academically very well. So that's also
[Guest]: something that didn't happen just like that for anybody. We always knew we were like that.
[Guest]: In terms of, even if you see in sports, all sportsmen don't have the best character, you
[Guest]: know. So to make these blanket statements like sports builds character. No, it doesn't.
[Guest]: Look at tennis. Djokovic is very different in terms of how his character is in general
[Guest]: from Nadal and Federer. You can even take a, I mean, look at how Nick Kyrgios, for example,
[Guest]: compared to some other younger players who are his competition. So it can, sport can
[Guest]: at best reveal character, but you are sort of built in a certain way. And I guess that's
[Guest]: actually why you got into sport or any other activity that you naturally sort of were sucked
[Guest]: into. So yeah, and I guess I want to travel, I keep wanting to travel because sport introduced
[Guest]: me to that. And the experiences that I have had through sport are the ones that have allowed
[Guest]: me to build my best friendships across the world. I have not ended up making friends,
[Guest]: as good friends outside of sport as I have in sport. So that's a gift of the sport, I
[Guest]: would say.
[Amit Varma]: That's a great point about sport revealing character. And I agree with you there. I think
[Amit Varma]: there's this quote by Steven Pinker about how nature gives you knobs, nurture turns
[Amit Varma]: them. And in a sense, I guess sport could turn some of those knobs that are already
[Amit Varma]: within you. You know, if you have a deep competitive sense, maybe hone that. If you are a gunda,
[Amit Varma]: maybe hone that and take you to MNS. Who knows if she didn't play volleyball, she may not
[Amit Varma]: have been at MNS. I want to go back to Disha and the pizza. And that's such a fantastic
[Guest]: story because it also reveals...
[Guest]: Yeah, we still laugh about it. It was hilarious.
[Amit Varma]: It also reveals the power of incentives. And who knows, maybe, you know, maybe it helped
[Amit Varma]: her discover a little bit of herself that no one can mess with her when she really wants
[Guest]: something she gets.
[Guest]: Oh, absolutely. Absolutely. And that's what we got out of that story about her. And that's
[Guest]: what we say to her as well. And you would see that about her even afterwards. If you
[Guest]: much later when all of us had cars and we were driving now, Disha was absolutely a boss
[Guest]: on the road. Like she could be stuck in the worst traffic ever and act like, you know,
[Guest]: you guys are all wrong. I am right. And I'm really cool. And I'm going to turn my car
[Guest]: around and leave. A lot of people really panic in those situations. And to stay calm and
[Guest]: really get your... I don't know how this happens, but I don't know. Maybe because all my friends
[Guest]: come from the sports background or something, but most of my friends are incredible drivers,
[Guest]: incredible drivers, women. I don't know how that is, but...
[Amit Varma]: I mean, there might be a little bit of self-selection there in the sense that people who get into
[Amit Varma]: sport and stay into sport would naturally have things like good hand-eye coordination
[Amit Varma]: and all of that, that might play a part. I want to double click on something that you
[Amit Varma]: said earlier about how, like, for example, if you're on a treadmill, you have to have
[Amit Varma]: a goal. You can't just be there as part of whatever. I mean, I guess Disha could think
[Amit Varma]: of, I'm going to order a pizza after this hour of running or whatever. But that also
[Amit Varma]: seems to sort of run parallel to, not necessarily contradictory to, but parallel to the advice
[Amit Varma]: that one gives all sports people and I, in fact, give my writing students of process
[Amit Varma]: being more important than goals. Like in his excellent book, Atomic Habits, James Clear
[Amit Varma]: also talks about how don't focus on goals, focus on processes. And that's something I
[Amit Varma]: also drive home to my writing students, that what's important is to build a writing habit.
[Amit Varma]: If you just say that I want to write op-eds and send them off, then once every three months
[Amit Varma]: you feel like writing something, you'll open your laptop and you'll open a Word doc and
[Amit Varma]: then you'll struggle like mad because you don't have the habit. It's more important
[Amit Varma]: to build a habit. And once you have the habit, you can do pretty much anything you want.
[Amit Varma]: The goals kind of take care of themselves. And this doesn't mean that don't have goals,
[Amit Varma]: but it just means that processes are all important and you've got to kind of follow them through,
[Amit Varma]: otherwise the goals won't really materialize. Another way of looking at it is don't think
[Amit Varma]: of the things you want to do, but think of the person you want to be. So the example
[Amit Varma]: I give my writing students here is that if you decide you want to read more, you could
[Amit Varma]: say, okay, every day between seven and eight, I'm going to read, right? And you do it one
[Amit Varma]: day, you do it two days, but then you fall off the wagon and then it just goes, life
[Amit Varma]: gets in the way. And then it leads to a vicious cycle where you beat yourself up and say,
[Amit Varma]: I am not a reading kind of person or I am a Netflix kind of person and everything kind
[Amit Varma]: of falls apart. But instead of doing this, if you just think about who is the best version
[Amit Varma]: of you, which is something I think everyone should sit and do anyway, if you just think
[Amit Varma]: about who is the best version of you, what that person does, which you don't do, what
[Amit Varma]: that person does not do, which you do and internalize some of that. And then let's say
[Amit Varma]: then you make yourself image as I am a self-taught person who loves to read. When I am bored,
[Amit Varma]: I don't reach for my phone, I reach for a book. You know, if you can internalize that
[Amit Varma]: self-image, then the reading habit automatically flows from there. Even if you don't read on
[Amit Varma]: a particular day, it doesn't matter because you've internalized that self-image that I
[Amit Varma]: am a reader and that self-image will sort of drive what you do instead of the other
[Amit Varma]: way around. And that's incredibly powerful. And I found this sort of powerful in my own
[Amit Varma]: life not being able to implement it as much as I would like to. But I think that much
[Amit Varma]: of my youth possibly went thinking too much about goals. In fact, the exact word you use
[Amit Varma]: fantasizing about goals and not actually building the processes and the habits that would give
[Amit Varma]: me the ability to actually accomplish these goals. Now, I know that when you spoke of
[Amit Varma]: having goals, you weren't contradicting this. You were on a parallel track where your point,
[Amit Varma]: I'm guessing, correct me if I'm wrong, your point was that you have to be clear about
[Amit Varma]: what you want out of something. Only then can you get the most out of it. You know,
[Amit Varma]: what are sort of your thoughts on these different tracks?
[Guest]: So Amit, first of all, when I said fantasizing, I meant using fantasy as one of the tools
[Guest]: to achieve what you're trying to achieve. I did not mean fantasizing in terms of just
[Guest]: dreaming away. So I did not mean dreaming away in that sense. So for me, fantasy is
[Guest]: just a tool you sort of use sometimes to get those extra endorphins to push the last mile.
[Guest]: And in terms of goals, the reason like, of course, like you said, we want to somehow
[Guest]: find a way to instruct our mind to have a process. And for everybody that instruction
[Guest]: works very differently. And so sometimes you ask people to set a goal so that they start
[Guest]: thinking that, hey, if I am on the treadmill tomorrow, I need to achieve this. So what
[Guest]: do I need to do today? And sometimes that may be seven days before you get on the treadmill.
[Guest]: Sometimes it's just tomorrow. Sometimes it is this evening and today morning you're thinking
[Guest]: about it. But what I feel is I have a problem with pointlessness, especially if you're giving
[Guest]: time because it can really waste your, I see a lot of people wasting their time in the
[Guest]: gym with false ideas of, oh, I've spent one hour on the treadmill, so I've done a lot.
[Guest]: If somebody spent 10 minutes, that may not mean they've done enough. Maybe they've just
[Guest]: warmed up. That's all not true. So we need to constantly ask ourselves why we are doing
[Guest]: something that we are doing. And if you try and force people to sort of have a goal, a
[Guest]: short term goal, then it forces them to ask themselves, what is it that I'm trying to
[Guest]: achieve here? Then sometimes people will come back and say, no, no, I just want to relax
[Guest]: on the treadmill and I'm just not going to put myself in that mental pressure. And then
[Guest]: I say that if that's your goal, then why are you doing it on the treadmill? Go walking,
[Guest]: listen to some music. Why should it be on the treadmill if you're looking for relaxation?
[Guest]: If you're looking at being on the treadmill because you want to get fitter, then you have
[Guest]: to somehow push yourself. So for me, it's really looking at the goal and pushing them
[Guest]: to form a process behind how will you really reach that goal. And in general, I think you
[Guest]: are not going to discover yourself if you're not trying to do something specific. If I'm
[Guest]: just going to go to the gym and say that, hey, I'm going to lift weights today and I'm
[Guest]: just going to be on the treadmill, then what am I discovering about myself today? Maybe
[Guest]: I'm going to try and run my fastest five kilometers and I fail. Then even then I have discovered
[Guest]: something about myself. Maybe I was not in the mood. Maybe evening doesn't work for me.
[Guest]: Maybe I should try morning. Maybe I've not eaten enough. Maybe I was not feeling well.
[Guest]: Something it could be just a small thing. But if I did not have a goal in the first
[Guest]: place, I'm just going to be on the treadmill for an hour without learning anything about
[Guest]: myself. Forget achieving something great, but I'll have not learned anything about anything.
[Guest]: Not about fitness, not about myself. Then why not watch a movie instead? So that's how
[Amit Varma]: I look at it. Yeah, I mean, I get what you're saying from
[Amit Varma]: a point of view of sort of being clear about what you want. And then once you're clear
[Amit Varma]: about what you want, you can build the processes that help you get there. But being clear about
[Amit Varma]: what you want is useful. So, you know, before we, you know, continue with your personal
[Amit Varma]: journey into engineering and all of that, and before we go there, we'll take a break.
[Amit Varma]: But before all of that, just wanted to finish talking about your sporting experiences through
[Amit Varma]: the system that you, you know, you're in the school team, and then you play city level,
[Amit Varma]: district level, all of that, you go through those motions. Now, it would seem that in
[Amit Varma]: the case of you or your friends, you enjoyed playing the sport, you were competitive, you
[Amit Varma]: loved it, you went through all of that. It's obviously a thrill to play at the national
[Amit Varma]: level. I went through all of that in chess as well. So I totally get it. But all of you
[Amit Varma]: knew all along that you're not going to be professional volleyball players. This is not
[Amit Varma]: going to be your life. There are other things that you will do. But for a lot of other people,
[Amit Varma]: it may not always be the case. There might be people from less privileged socioeconomic
[Amit Varma]: backgrounds who aren't good at anything else, who don't have other opportunities necessarily
[Amit Varma]: available to them, but they are bloody good at this one sport. So what is that journey
[Amit Varma]: for them like? Because I'm assuming that the kind of corruption which you were victim to
[Amit Varma]: would be endemic in sport, especially in North India, from whatever I hear Delhi, Bihar and
[Amit Varma]: so on. It would be absolutely endemic and making it hard for talented people to come
[Amit Varma]: up through the system. What would their incentives be like? Like you begin playing sport, I'm
[Amit Varma]: guessing where you are dreaming of a future when you're playing for India and you're playing
[Amit Varma]: in the Olympics and all of that. And then at a certain point in time, you got to temper
[Amit Varma]: it down and realize that all this is not going to happen. That the best I can hope for is
[Amit Varma]: a job in services or railways and it's a steady job and that's kind of my life. Right? So
[Amit Varma]: that kind of facing reality for a person like that can also sort of be pretty heartbreaking.
[Amit Varma]: So give me a sense of that landscape. And you were in a sense, part of that landscape,
[Amit Varma]: but not a prisoner of it because you had other things to do. But a lot of people were much
[Guest]: more invested in it than you would have been. Yeah, you're right. In that sense, I must
[Guest]: admit that we came from privileged backgrounds in that sense where we always knew that our
[Guest]: paths will be fairly academic in whatever directions, science, art, commerce, whatever.
[Guest]: But people who come from smaller towns, who are from the underprivileged backgrounds,
[Guest]: they are normally mostly trying to get a job into railways and some of them make it. And
[Guest]: I would say that's a good scenario for them because at the end of the day, it's a government
[Guest]: job. If you talk about women per se, I do not know if they really enter with any ambition
[Guest]: at all. I think it's just that these smaller towns in Maharashtra had a really good sporting
[Guest]: culture. So we saw a lot of women come out and play volleyball, but at some point they
[Guest]: got married and that's pretty much the end of it. And there are some that continued and
[Guest]: they played far too many nationals, got into railways and continue to play the sport and
[Guest]: do so now as well and played for the international team. But the truth of their life is also
[Guest]: that they are in railways. And there's not really much above, much to say beyond that
[Guest]: future, unless some people really desire it. And I do see a place for it, especially for
[Guest]: people who are coming from smaller towns and those who want to desperately continue playing
[Guest]: the sport. But at some point, realities of life take over. You want more money because
[Guest]: now you have a family, you have children perhaps, and it's just not enough. And that's when
[Guest]: people start dropping off. And I came from the same landscape and I do think that the
[Guest]: landscape is changing. I would not say that for volleyball it's changed a lot because
[Guest]: I think more than two or three women that were active during my time are now among the
[Guest]: top 15 all-time great volleyball players, but we don't know their names unless you were
[Guest]: following volleyball. So I would not think that they are getting anything out of it besides
[Guest]: the fact that they're playing for railways and then for the international team. So I
[Guest]: think in sports such as volleyball, we really need to make a lot more effort so that there
[Guest]: is enough funding, enough privatization in a sense that allows sportsmen from these sports
[Guest]: to start making money. And if you look at volleyball as a sport, take any cricket ground,
[Guest]: a community ground or so, you'll always see a net there. I see a lot of potential for
[Guest]: volleyball in terms of how exciting it can be for people to watch it. And so, yeah, I
[Guest]: mean, when Joy said that he is pioneering the league, I was very, very happy because
[Guest]: I do see that people will be interested in volleyball. I have seen the crowds in smaller
[Guest]: universities really enjoy the games. And if that privatization happens for games like
[Guest]: volleyball, we are still waiting for it. We are still quite stuck with cricket, I would
[Guest]: say in that sense. And why even volleyball? I was among maybe the 10 people that bought
[Guest]: tickets to the Hockey Premier League back in 2013, I guess 2012 or 2013 for the games
[Guest]: that happened in Bangalore. And again, I was friends with some hardcore sports fans who
[Guest]: worked with me. And we were all like, hey, you know what, we are going to buy our friends
[Guest]: tickets if they don't want to come. We're just going to request them to give us two
[Guest]: hours of their time. And we are going to ensure that we take at least 10 people and these
[Guest]: players see at least 10 people in the stands. And we went for all the games and the tickets
[Guest]: were merely 100 bucks or so. But that was not our idea. Even if the tickets were 500
[Guest]: bucks, we would have still bought them and we would have ensured that we took a sizable
[Guest]: crowd to watch the Hockey Premier League because we wanted to support these sports. And this
[Guest]: is our national game. If we were not able to fill the stands for the national games,
[Guest]: then what hope do we have, especially from a future for sportsmen point of view, not
[Guest]: just viewership. So, yeah, I am not particularly bought into the whole idea of sports has a
[Guest]: future even now. Unless, I would say for individual sports, if your parents are able to afford
[Guest]: getting you a really good coach and a nutritionist, then I think individually you can still risk
[Guest]: making sport your career. But otherwise, for team sports and especially non-cricket sports,
[Guest]: I don't see the landscape very different. And I also think of this from the point of
[Amit Varma]: view of incentives. You know, I'm glad you mentioned privatisation a few times because
[Amit Varma]: that is the only way out because when the government runs sport, I mean, cricket is
[Amit Varma]: practically the only sport which is not completely run by the government. And we've seen what's
[Amit Varma]: happened there. And, you know, commerce kind of rescued the game in a sense, you know,
[Amit Varma]: the IPL and all was, yes, done because of the desire to make money. But you make money
[Amit Varma]: only by giving other people value. And those are great incentives. And that's exactly what
[Amit Varma]: happened. And it therefore transformed the game. And, you know, Joy's, of course, been
[Amit Varma]: on the show a couple of times and he's spoken about all the work he's done first when they
[Amit Varma]: organised the U-17 Football World Cup a few years back and how hard they worked to try
[Amit Varma]: to build an ecosystem of that. And then, of course, his Volleyball League. And it strikes
[Amit Varma]: me that that's really what will determine which sports become popular and which don't
[Amit Varma]: in the future. Because the incentive of the government, any government organisation will
[Amit Varma]: always be just to do whatever little rent-seeking they can do, just keep things going. The incentive
[Amit Varma]: is not to think ahead and invest and nurture people and nurture ecosystems. That simply
[Amit Varma]: doesn't happen. That all fades away in the graveyard of good intentions. And that also
[Amit Varma]: sort of makes me kind of think about, you know, which sports survive and which sports
[Amit Varma]: don't. Like one of the reasons that Joy gave for, you know, why volleyball could be a good
[Amit Varma]: TV sport is that the ball is big and people can follow the ball on TV. Whereas with table
[Amit Varma]: tennis, you're just kind of seeing a sort of blur. So the one could, you know, argue
[Amit Varma]: that then golf shouldn't work either. But that's a very big sport.
[Guest]: But I would, sorry to interject there, but I think there's one more reason why a sport
[Guest]: like volleyball would survive is because people see the nets around them. Every cricket ground,
[Guest]: every community ground that you see, there are two poles and a net. It's not so difficult
[Guest]: to find it. It's not expensive to get one ball among five or six or ten players if you
[Guest]: can gather them. So accessibility to the equipment. And the other beauty of volleyball, like I
[Guest]: was telling you earlier at lunches, you can be a volleyball enthusiast who just punches
[Guest]: the ball and just lets it go to the other side of the net. Or you can really know the
[Guest]: technicalities of the game and really be passionate about that. But the beauty is that everybody
[Guest]: can really try playing the game and come across people in and around their communities playing
[Guest]: it. So if this game is now on the TV as well and whoever feels like, hey, I want to get
[Guest]: my hands on a volleyball, they actually can. But if you talk about, let's say, a game like
[Guest]: tennis or even hockey for that matter, it's very difficult to suddenly say, hey, from
[Guest]: tomorrow I want to play hockey. I don't know where I'm going to go and how I'm going to
[Guest]: go and start. How am I am I going to gather people who can make any head or tail of how
[Guest]: to hold a hockey bat and then just even for fun sakes have a game. Tennis for that matter.
[Guest]: I think tennis is one of the sports. I've tried my hand at a number of sports. And tennis
[Guest]: is one sport where I feel like unless you understand even the basic swing, you will
[Guest]: not be able to get the ball on the other side of the net at all. You have to understand
[Guest]: how that basic forehand swing happens to even be on the court. Otherwise, you'll be like
[Guest]: I'm hitting balls in the net or just outside the court somewhere. So it's a very technical
[Guest]: sport in that sense. But I think with volleyball, that's the beauty. That is the beauty. And
[Guest]: I guess to some extent that is true for basketball as well. And so both of these sports have,
[Guest]: I think, a good future. And we've always, even for basketball, we've always had really
[Guest]: good players. My school team, for that matter, was amongst the best in Pune city for the
[Guest]: men's basketball team that we had. And I've seen some phenomenal matches. And I'm somebody
[Guest]: who's watched a lot of these sports that I talk about internationally as well. I've gone
[Guest]: and watched the NBA in the US. I've watched people like Lionel Messi play live. I've watched
[Guest]: Roger Federer play live. I've seen how these games are set up, what people are enjoying.
[Guest]: And I would say that if India was able to pick up team sports more and really bring
[Guest]: more glamour into it in some sense, then people would enjoy these sports as well and would
[Guest]: pay for them. And I feel that the one thing that we should sort of not do, and I'm making
[Guest]: this comment as a sportsman and not as somebody who's in the business of sport, in that desperation
[Guest]: to make that sport known and popular, I don't think we should start bringing the sport to
[Guest]: the public outside of the courts, you know, like just staging it in malls or anywhere
[Guest]: else. And I feel like people would not genuinely build love for a sport when you are trying
[Guest]: to sort of get them to like a sport desperately. So that is my personal opinion. But it is
[Guest]: like any, you know, classical, passionate person for any subject who tries to have a
[Guest]: negative opinion about anything anybody is doing. But yeah.
[Amit Varma]: No, and I agree about the sort of the reasons volleyball could be so popular because I remember,
[Amit Varma]: you know, when I was 11 or 12, I tried playing a game of tennis. I just tried once. I spent
[Amit Varma]: 15 minutes. I could not get the ball across the net. You're absolutely right about that.
[Amit Varma]: So then I said, forget it, you know, I'm not going to. Well, another of my friends was
[Amit Varma]: watching a lot of tennis on TV, and he saw all the winners are not ones that go through
[Amit Varma]: the middle, they go on the side. He was saying hit the side of the other court and all of
[Unknown]: that. I was saying, boss, I can't get it over the net. But the little volleyball I have
[Guest]: played, I have got it over the net. It is not a big deal.
[Guest]: Exactly. And which is why it's a wonderful sport to promote because everybody will be
[Guest]: able to get that instant gratification. Even if they don't know the rules, even if they
[Guest]: don't know exactly how the ball is hit, even if they're making fouls, they'll at least
[Guest]: get that instant gratification. And I guess badminton is famous for that particular reason.
[Guest]: Because even if you've never touched a badminton racket today, I could take you to the court
[Guest]: and in the next 10 minutes, you'll be like, of the 10 shuttles that I have hit, at least
[Guest]: four or five went on the other side. So there is that instant gratification.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, that's a fascinating way to think about sport. Like one thinks about sport in terms
[Amit Varma]: of its qualities based on how we see elite sports people play it. But to think about
[Amit Varma]: how the common person would take to it and the instant gratification, which I never really
[Amit Varma]: thought about in this context. A final question before we go into the break, which is that
[Amit Varma]: it also therefore strikes me that, you know, typically what has happened is that sport
[Amit Varma]: has been a government thing, right? So sporting bodies that come up everywhere tend to be
[Amit Varma]: either from the government or they tend to be monopsonies of a sort in the sense that
[Amit Varma]: any sports person within a country then has really got to be on the good books of that
[Amit Varma]: particular board or sporting body or whatever, and there's no choice and that bedeviled even
[Amit Varma]: cricket for a long time. My sense is that a lot of sports don't have a market. They
[Amit Varma]: would not exist if the government wasn't supporting them. And in some ways, they are artefacts.
[Amit Varma]: Like when I think of, say, javelin throw or discuss throw or whatever, most people are
[Amit Varma]: watching those sports once in four years in the Olympics, if at all, you know, they might
[Amit Varma]: be even watching it in the background while the 100 meters is going on or somebody's flinging
[Amit Varma]: a spear into the air. But that leads to the question of what should the government's role
[Amit Varma]: in sport be? Because there are deeper issues here in the sense one issue, of course, is
[Amit Varma]: the issue of whatever the government does has an opportunity cost. You know, every paisa
[Amit Varma]: that the government has is acquired by coercion. So there's a moral cost there. And while you
[Amit Varma]: accept that there are things that the state should do and things that the state should
[Amit Varma]: not do, I would be one of those who would argue that the state should not fund sports,
[Amit Varma]: especially in a poor country like India, where you have so many other problems. And you know,
[Amit Varma]: you have scarce resources. So it almost in a lot of places, it feels like a nationalistic
[Amit Varma]: vanity program, that we have to have the best team in this or the best team in that and
[Amit Varma]: the government puts money into it and all of that. And also on the one hand, I have
[Amit Varma]: like dual instincts. On the one hand, I'd love to see the market determining this, that
[Amit Varma]: whichever sports get an audience, you know, that much money goes into them and they survive
[Amit Varma]: and they thrive accordingly. And at the same time, entrepreneurs everywhere like Joy is
[Amit Varma]: doing with the Volleyball League can, you know, use their creativity and skills at innovation
[Amit Varma]: to bring sports in front of the public and create that demand if they feel that the sport
[Amit Varma]: is inherently worth it. But if there's no market for watching javelin throwers apart
[Amit Varma]: from once in four years, I'm like, okay with that, right? Sad as it is. That's one aspect.
[Amit Varma]: But on a contrary note, I also feel that there is a romantic charm to having these artifacts
[Amit Varma]: around, to having these sports. For example, I believe that Test cricket would not survive
[Amit Varma]: today if not for the IPL. It's very sad and Test cricket is a great game. I am a cricket
[Amit Varma]: tragic when it comes to Test cricket. But equally, I love the IPL and all of that. And
[Amit Varma]: one of the reasons I love the IPL is that it's actually subsidizing the other forms
[Amit Varma]: of the game and keeping them alive. So, whereas, you know, on the one hand, you could say that
[Amit Varma]: just let the market dictate if no one wants to watch Test, that's what it is. But what
[Amit Varma]: I actively recommend is that we keep subsidizing Test cricket for what it is. So, I'm kind
[Amit Varma]: of torn between these two instincts at a purely rational level. I don't see that why a sport
[Amit Varma]: which is watched by no one should be funded by the hard-earned money of taxpayers, you
[Amit Varma]: know, which could be put to other good uses. But on the other hand, I do see sort of the
[Amit Varma]: point that, you know, there is much richness there and variety there which we don't necessarily
[Amit Varma]: want to lose. So, what are sort of your thoughts on this?
[Guest]: So I agree with you. I can see why somebody would say that, hey, I'm not a Javelin fan
[Guest]: and why is my money being used to fund this. But it's also, Amit, sort of a chicken and
[Guest]: egg question whether we create the audience or whether the audience exists. And I guess
[Guest]: the only sport where in India the answer is clear is for cricket. And so, for everything
[Guest]: else, we need to create the audience. Because in that sense, if you think about it and if
[Guest]: I'm being very cribby, then I'm going to say that we haven't even invested in other sports
[Guest]: enough for people to decide if they like the sport or not. Do I not go for a basketball
[Guest]: match because I don't like basketball or because I don't know about basketball? And then whose
[Guest]: responsibility is it to make me aware about whether I like watching basketball or not
[Guest]: or volleyball? So, in that sense, I definitely think it's the government's responsibility
[Guest]: to bring these sports to us. And like I said to you, when we were playing state and national
[Guest]: tournaments in smaller villages, we used to have big crowds. So, start there, come to
[Guest]: the city, maybe slowly. These sports are definitely helping smaller cities and the youth in those
[Guest]: cities find focus, find a certain ambition, watch with their own eyes people who they
[Guest]: can idolize in that sense. I mean, watching a Neeraj Chopra on national TV is very different
[Guest]: from watching somebody being cheered in front of your eyes and them winning a national medal
[Guest]: or a state level medal. And for you to be able to go to them and say, hey, I really
[Guest]: thought you were very good. And think about somebody from a smaller village looking at
[Guest]: that, that person at that time is Neeraj Chopra for them. And so, we need to multiply those
[Guest]: Neeraj Chopras in that sense. And when it comes to athletics that you specifically mentioned,
[Guest]: a market has to be created for them as sports that are clubbed together, discus throw, javelin,
[Guest]: all those sports, long jump, short jump. And to be honest, Commonwealth Games come every
[Guest]: two years. And so, why should the government really do something else for you to go and
[Guest]: watch that sport? I guess they are, in that sense, being supported when it comes to showcasing.
[Guest]: I think Commonwealth Games do get enough attention from everybody. People go and watch it, buy
[Guest]: tickets, talk about the wins at the Commonwealth Games, as well as they talk about our Olympic
[Guest]: Games. So, I wouldn't say that we need to do something very different to platform these
[Guest]: sports more. And the other thing is, if you really ask me about audiences and what they
[Guest]: enjoy, I definitely think that you should start with team games. Because there's a lot
[Guest]: more dynamics that's being displayed when a team game is being played versus sports
[Guest]: like badminton and tennis, where what's going on in the sportsman's mind is really anybody's
[Guest]: guess. But with team games, you will see drama, you will see the interaction with the coach,
[Guest]: you will see the interaction between players, you will see the fights. With basketball,
[Guest]: you're going to definitely see some random fouls and everything. So, if I purely look
[Guest]: at it from a commercial point of view, all that can be done. I was super, super excited
[Guest]: when the Superfight League was launched. Also in, I guess, 2016 was, 2017, January or February
[Guest]: was the first time it was held. And it had, so it had MMA, all kinds of mixed martial
[Guest]: arts. And you actually then saw a lot of the wrestlers, even women, who may or may not
[Guest]: be doing as well as aiming for an Olympic medal, but who had the skills for a mixed
[Guest]: martial arts. And then, you know, there was the stage of Superfight League again, available
[Guest]: to them. And coincidentally, I think the Delhi Dawns, or I don't remember, Delhi Super Dawns
[Guest]: or something, something like that was the name of the team that won. And the captain
[Guest]: of that team, 2-3 days before he came to Delhi, was doing Muay Thai in Phuket with me. And
[Guest]: he was, so of course, I was a beginner, he was in the advanced category. And somebody
[Guest]: stopped by and said, hey, there's an Indian fighter here as well. He's training at Tiger,
[Guest]: where I was training as well. And then I spoke to him and Jason Solomon, his name is. And
[Guest]: he was like, yeah, yeah, I'm going now. And he was like, I have all these personal training
[Guest]: tickets that I got because I'm sponsored, but now I cannot because I have been called
[Guest]: to the Superfight League. And then he left me all his personal training tickets, and
[Guest]: I did a lot of personal classes. But it was very interesting to watch the Superfight League.
[Guest]: And I hear that it's going to happen again, or it happened, I think, one more year. And
[Guest]: it attracted a lot of crowd. And I don't think I've seen a more technical game than MMA.
[Guest]: You know, the little experience that I have had with Jiu Jitsu and Muay Thai and basics
[Guest]: of wrestling, you find out things about the body that you did not know. Like you would
[Guest]: not know what little movement I can do in your body that can choke you. You do not know
[Guest]: how I can lock your body in a second. You learn so much about these things. And I'm
[Guest]: happy to see that these attempts are being made. I want to see them happen more regularly.
[Guest]: So I think we are moving in that direction. I see the intent. I'm sure that they have
[Guest]: sponsors and people are trying to bring these sports to us. But it has to be much more consistent.
[Guest]: And like I said to you, it has to begin with team sports.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, all wise thoughts. And I agree with you, except that I think I'd love to see civil
[Amit Varma]: society and individuals and companies take the initiative to do all of this. I think
[Amit Varma]: the government has pretty much broadly failed over the last few decades. But that is sort
[Amit Varma]: of just kind of where I come from. And I said that was a final question, but I can't help
[Amit Varma]: this follow up. Like I've gotten into different sports at different points in time. Me too.
[Amit Varma]: Cycling is my latest drug. But me as a watcher, you as a doer. So there is a difference. Like
[Amit Varma]: you know, Neil Simon once said in his play Barefoot in the Park, there are two kinds
[Amit Varma]: of people in the world, watchers and the doers. And the watchers sit around watching the doers
[Amit Varma]: do. So, you know, you're the doer, I'm the watcher. But among the sports I got into very
[Amit Varma]: briefly was boxing. And this was around the time Lennox Lewis was at his peak. And, you
[Amit Varma]: know, so and obviously, I entered that rabbit hole. And the guy was such a technical genius
[Amit Varma]: and just a brilliant boxer. But then later, I began to just be repelled by boxing. It
[Amit Varma]: seemed to me like a barbaric sport. Like I seriously think it shouldn't exist. Like what
[Amit Varma]: fun can you get from watching people, you know, beat each other up in brutal ways. And
[Amit Varma]: I'm sorry if I sound like a bit of a sissy. I mean, I wouldn't want to box myself. And
[Amit Varma]: I get the technical aspects of it and all of that. But those are there in every sport,
[Amit Varma]: right? And but that just seems to me like one sport that is both an artifact and something
[Amit Varma]: that you know, so and I'm not saying ban it because why, you know, consenting adults as
[Amit Varma]: a market for it, all of that is great. But my personal feeling is that I just feel repelled.
[Amit Varma]: I feel that is where sport crosses the line from being healthy to something not so much.
[Guest]: So what I know, it's it's really funny. I mean, I can I can completely see why you would
[Guest]: think that. See, for me, I accidentally learned a bit of boxing because there was a point.
[Guest]: I mean, it's a it's a long story. Do you want me to get into it? Okay, so so I had just
[Guest]: I had just quit my eight year long stint with Shell in the later part of 2016. And I had
[Guest]: this startup idea and I wanted to put my money into it and launch my startup and it was in
[Guest]: the field of fitness. But you know, you go through a period after you worked with a company
[Guest]: like Shell for eight years, you go, you quit and while you're quitting, you have all kinds
[Guest]: of great feelings about how courageous you are to quit your dream job and all of that.
[Guest]: But then reality strikes you for a few months after that and you have basically in all these
[Guest]: years started defining your, you've associated your identity with the company you work for,
[Guest]: which a lot of people fall victim to. And that happens with somebody who's worked with
[Guest]: Google, with Facebook, whoever's the, I mean, whichever is the top company in your field.
[Guest]: And I did not know where to sort of get rid of that anxiety that I've quit now, I must
[Guest]: put money where my mouth is. And some of my friends from Dubai had been to these sports
[Guest]: schools in Thailand and Thailand is very famous for its sports schools. And they had been
[Guest]: there and I said, okay, I've never done a solo trip in my life. I'm going to find out
[Guest]: about one of these sports schools. And I was already doing quite a lot of sport, but I
[Guest]: said, okay, I'm going to go there. And I had never done any contact sport before this.
[Guest]: And there were all these schools have a fitness element as well, fitness classes. And I was
[Guest]: like, yeah, maybe those are the classes I will do. And then I already, I booked like
[Guest]: a month of training in this school called Tiger Muay Thai, which is in Phuket. And it's
[Guest]: one of the world's best school to train in mixed martial arts. So some of the topmost
[Guest]: players currently are sponsored by Tiger Muay Thai. So the world's second best female champion
[Guest]: right now, Valentina Shevchenko represents Tiger Muay Thai. A lot of other MMA current
[Guest]: stars are sponsored by them. So I didn't know all of this. I just knew that the school was
[Guest]: popular came up in my Google search. And I was like, okay, I'm going to risk it. And
[Guest]: I'm going to do my first solo trip. And I had never been to Phuket before that. And
[Guest]: I land in Phuket and it's it pretty much looks like Goa. And it's just these small lanes
[Guest]: and you Tiger had put me up in in one of the little hotels near near it. And these are
[Guest]: all really rooms because all you do is you are working out like dogs the entire day and
[Guest]: coming back to shower and sleep. And I get into the room and I'm freaking out. And I
[Guest]: was like, okay, I've noticed the school on my way to the hotel. And, and the entire street
[Guest]: called, I forgot the name of the street, but so I tie it. That's what the street is called.
[Guest]: It's about 800 meters and it has over 10 or 20 sports schools. And you go through that
[Guest]: street to your hotel and all you're seeing is men and women with six packs and tattoos.
[Guest]: And here you are. And you're like, okay, have I literally booked classes among these people?
[Guest]: And so I'm freaking out. I get to my room. I go to the school. I say, okay, I've booked
[Guest]: this package. And they're like, yeah, you can take as many fitness classes as you want
[Guest]: and as many MMA classes as you want. So MMA had different classes, Muay Thai, Boxing,
[Guest]: Jiu Jitsu, and it had Krabi Kabong and all those things. And I didn't know where to start.
[Guest]: And I was like, okay, fine, I'm going to muster the courage and I'm going to just go for this
[Guest]: boxing class. I have never done boxing. I go to the coach and before the class, I'm like,
[Guest]: what do I need to buy? And then he tells me about the wraps and the gloves and the sizes
[Guest]: and I get them. And I forget to ask him what's the level of this class. And it was a Friday
[Guest]: and it was a sparring class. So that's when you actually fight. They don't teach you skills
[Guest]: on that day. And there I am and the class starts and I get punched so badly. There's
[Guest]: this Canadian girl who's already a boxer or whatever. I get punched really badly. But
[Guest]: I finished the class and I'm in pain after the class. The next day I wake up and I'm
[Guest]: like, I want to do this again. This time I'm like, I want to learn how to do this. This
[Guest]: was interesting. So you were talking about whether you... So there's obviously a cult
[Guest]: audience that follows these sports because maybe they are also trying it out on the side
[Guest]: or understand the details of the sport. And then there is an element which purely enjoys
[Guest]: people beating each other up. But if you ask me personally, I would end up following MMA
[Guest]: and I ended up following it only after I had respect for the sport. And that is pretty
[Guest]: much how I function, whether I'm talking to certain people or not, whether I'm watching
[Guest]: something or not. For me, that's how I do it. That person or that sport or that thing
[Guest]: that I'm doing has to win my respect for me to give my time to it. But so I can see why
[Guest]: people feel all this adrenaline when they see these sports. But if you found boxing
[Guest]: so violent in a way, then you would absolutely not like Muay Thai because Muay Thai was the
[Guest]: old form of martial arts that... It's the national game of Thailand and it was used
[Guest]: in war. So they were actually creating soldiers who basically used no guards, nothing. And
[Guest]: with boxing and kickboxing, there's a lot of dunking and jumping around and all of that.
[Guest]: But Muay Thai is very classical. It's like, I am here, punch me or I'm going to punch
[Guest]: you. So you don't have any jumping around and dodging and everything. It's literally
[Guest]: there and people are going to hit you and you're going to have to hit back. But then
[Guest]: you develop respect for the skill that you're using and you trust the fact that the opponent
[Guest]: is playing by rules. But having said that, it needs a lot of courage. I don't know if
[Guest]: I'll ever get to a point where I'll even play a friendly match. Right now, I only do classes.
[Guest]: But I think it's the endorphins that people really want to watch these games for. And
[Guest]: imagining themselves, you know, kahi na kahi humare mann mein thoda sa wo hota hai, that
[Guest]: sort of anger, pent up anger, whatever, that feeling of getting adrenaline. Some people
[Guest]: will go and do skydiving, some people will do scuba diving, like that. Some people will
[Guest]: be like, okay, I want to, you know, get to try this new sport that challenges me. And
[Guest]: sometimes it may start by watching it and feeling like, okay, you know, this is interesting.
[Guest]: So or how do these people do it? I would probably also watch boxing just to see how, like, okay,
[Guest]: I want to see if this person gets punched so many times, how is he still standing? So
[Guest]: yeah, I think it could be multiple reasons, I would say. But I can see, I think your question
[Guest]: is very valid. I don't know why people would want to watch such violence in a sense.
[Amit Varma]: No, I mean, for me, it's really like for any sport I'm drawn to, it's an intellectual challenge
[Amit Varma]: also figuring out what's happening inside someone's head, what are the strategic aspects,
[Amit Varma]: what are the tactical aspects and all that. And recently, I watched this video, I think,
[Amit Varma]: as usual on Twitter, somebody posted it of this ex British boxing champion, I forget
[Amit Varma]: the name, if I find it, I'll link it in the show notes, this ex British boxing champion
[Amit Varma]: who was working as a bouncer in a nightclub. So they had, I think, the CCTV or mobile phone
[Amit Varma]: camera footage that he's outside and there's some other random guy who is arguing and behaving
[Amit Varma]: obnoxiously and all of that. And this guy's fellow bouncers are trying to handle him.
[Amit Varma]: But at one point, he just gets too obnoxious. So this guy goes and just gives him one punch
[Amit Varma]: and he's out flat. Yeah. And I rewinded and watched that moment some 20 times because
[Amit Varma]: it is such a thrilling moment. Like one, of course, it is good versus bad, the asshole
[Amit Varma]: gets punched, right? But the other aspect, it is surely some kind of primal thing, you
[Amit Varma]: know? Yes, it is. And as I'm rewinding and watching it, I'm also asking myself that why
[Amit Varma]: do you find this moment so thrilling? As someone who has never punched anyone, right? I run
[Amit Varma]: away from violence as fast as I can. But so why is it so thrilling that you're rewinding
[Amit Varma]: and watching it? And it's a madly viral video. And it's that moment which is viral. You know,
[Amit Varma]: there's a lot of calm, he's just standing there calmly, calmly, calmly, calmly, then
[Guest]: suddenly walk up and whack. But you know, conversely, Amit, the funny thing is now because
[Guest]: I have been to Tiger many times and spent a lot of time there and seen some world class
[Guest]: fighters, a lot of them. The funny thing is, these fighters who you see in these fights
[Guest]: really going at each other within the rules of the game, but really with power, with,
[Guest]: you know, you are sometimes looking at the spot and thinking, oh my God, this is so violent.
[Guest]: If you actually meet these people in person, you will notice that some of these people
[Guest]: are the kindest and the most soft spoken people you'll meet. And sometimes you're not able
[Guest]: to make that connection. You know, it's easier to make that connection with a Roger Federer,
[Guest]: with a Rafael Nadal and all of that. But you look at these people and some of them are
[Guest]: full of, you know, like tattoos all around and really aggressive entry to the arena and
[Guest]: all of this. But if you meet them, otherwise, I have seen that some of them are the warmest,
[Guest]: most kindest, accommodating people. I don't know if that happens because they just have
[Guest]: a better understanding of their body and their mind and controlling it as well. I think controlling
[Guest]: it and controlling yourself and staying within the rules when you're doing something as provocative
[Guest]: as a contact sport, I think that takes a lot of character. I do feel so. And when I have
[Guest]: also tried to do wrestling or something and you're doing all these exercises, and some
[Guest]: of these exercises are ones where you're taught how to take someone down. Now, if I am walking
[Guest]: or if I am in a match with you and you bring me down, all of that are times when I'm falling
[Guest]: down when I don't know it. But when you're doing exercises and when you're learning and
[Guest]: you know that, okay, Shruti, Amit stand like this, this is how this takedown is, I'm allowing
[Guest]: you to take me down. And then when you get it right, when you get that technique right,
[Guest]: even though I know you're going to make me fall down now, flat on my back, it happens
[Guest]: in a second because you've got the technique right. And when you fall down, you feel the
[Guest]: chills all the way from your spine to your brain. And to put yourself in those situations
[Guest]: again and again and again and then learn how to do it. And then slowly your technique improves
[Guest]: and then you realize, oh my God, if this technique is so powerful that I can take down somebody
[Guest]: twice my height or size, because you understood in terms of the human body where those trigger
[Guest]: points are, what you have to push or pull. And when you get that feeling that, hey, I
[Guest]: have overcome this fear of falling down and feeling those chills, and then you show up
[Guest]: for training the next day as well, you learn something about yourself. A, because you want
[Guest]: to experience the thrill of it, you want to get, you want to feel the endorphins of being
[Guest]: courageous once again. So that is that is that cycle in a way. So I can understand it
[Guest]: from the point of view of players or people who've tried it, that they are big fans of
[Guest]: the sport. And for everyone else, it's a spectacle.
[Amit Varma]: That's fascinating. And I'll actually double click on that. But we'll do it after the break.
[Amit Varma]: And then we'll, you know, get back to your personal trajectory, where I think we're still
[Amit Varma]: early in the story. So that's after a quick break.
[Unknown]: Yeah, sure.
[Unknown]: Hi, my name is Nishant Jain. And besides creating episode art for Amit, I also make the Sneaky
[Unknown]: Art Podcast, a show where I have deep, insightful conversations with other artists who, just
[Unknown]: like me, draw and paint their world from observation. This show is for you if you are trying to
[Unknown]: be an artist. It is also for you if you just want to make more room for art in your life.
[Unknown]: This show is for you if you simply want to become a more mindful observer of your fast
[Unknown]: changing world. Conversations include a cross country cyclist making a painting every day
[Unknown]: of an incredible 4000 mile journey. An artist in Malaysia who found inspiration in a reality
[Unknown]: show about tattoo artists in LA. And a sketcher in Mumbai who chronicled the lives of the
[Unknown]: city's artisans through the first wave of COVID. It is a more beautiful world once you
[Unknown]: begin to see the sneaky art of everyday life. Add Sneaky Art to your podcast feed. Use the
[Unknown]: link in the episode description.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the scene in the unseen. I'm chatting with Shruti Jagirdar about her fascinating
[Amit Varma]: life and what the impact sport has had on her life and also later on in the show her
[Amit Varma]: insights on nutrition, health, the human body, so on and so forth. I want to pick up from
[Amit Varma]: the schools in Thailand where one of the points that you made was that, you know, many of
[Amit Varma]: these MMA fighters, contrary to stereotype, they end up being really gentle people. And
[Amit Varma]: there are two possible reasons for this. One would be that the distribution of gentleness
[Amit Varma]: within MMA fighters is the same as in the general public. But you just notice it more
[Amit Varma]: when you meet them because you don't expect them to be like that. And they are the ones
[Amit Varma]: you remember. But the other one is that the sport, the nature of the sport, genuinely
[Amit Varma]: changes people, maybe by making them more aware of their power, maybe by making them
[Amit Varma]: just changing them in different fundamental ways. So before we continue sort of with your
[Amit Varma]: Thailand experience, that's sort of a question that I also want to get into, that earlier
[Amit Varma]: we spoke about the different ways in which sport changed you as a person. But more specifically,
[Amit Varma]: you know, what did sport teach you, for example, about your own body? What did it teach you
[Amit Varma]: about the limits of what you can do and what you cannot do? And in what ways did it shape
[Guest]: your attitude towards other people? That's a very good question, Amit, because
[Guest]: I don't think I learned so much about my body when I was a volleyball player. But because
[Guest]: I enjoy sport and because I enjoy putting myself in challenging situations, I have,
[Guest]: like I said, tried my hand at a lot of sport and I continue to do it. And part of that
[Guest]: exploration happened because as I went into engineering and into corporate, it was very
[Guest]: difficult to find women volleyball players. And everywhere I have gone, I have played
[Guest]: a little bit of volleyball, etc. But you couldn't find continuity. So you start exploring other
[Guest]: sports. And the things that I have learned about my body is really, first of all, putting
[Guest]: yourself out there and testing yourself against something. Instead of imagining you'll not
[Guest]: be able to do it. And not letting others tell you what you can do and what you cannot do.
[Guest]: Because you know, this thing happened with me back in 2009 or 10. I had just joined Shell
[Guest]: and there's a lot of beautiful treks around Bangalore and in Karnataka. And my company
[Guest]: had a bunch of very, very interested folk who formed a group and who would go trekking
[Guest]: every two months. And I've ended up trekking a lot around Bangalore and some of the most
[Guest]: challenging treks around Bangalore I've done with them. And at one point, there was a trek
[Guest]: that was organized to Brahmagiri. And Brahmagiri is this trek that normally people would end
[Guest]: up doing over two days. And a group of our batchmates from Shell, they all went for this
[Guest]: trek. And the way this trek is, is you climb a mountain, which takes you about six, seven
[Guest]: hours, eight hours or so. And then there is five kilometers of grassland before you reach
[Guest]: the peak itself. And the grasslands have short, dense forests in the middle. They're called
[Guest]: Sholas. And that's where you have wild cats and you have elephants and other things. So
[Guest]: you have to scale those grasslands and then you come to the peak, which is about 700 meters
[Guest]: or so, but which has a 70 degree incline. So this group of our colleagues who went and
[Guest]: they could not get to, they all got to the peak, but the group was found it so difficult
[Guest]: that half of them just couldn't climb the peak. And some people who were helping others
[Guest]: were not able to scale the peak and then they had to come back or so. And then four, five
[Guest]: of them said that, we want to do this again because we didn't complete the trek. And this
[Guest]: was around the time when one of them asked me, oh, do you want to go to this trek? I
[Guest]: hadn't been to the first expedition. And they were like, no, no, we want to do Brahmagiri
[Guest]: in one day. And I had not done, I had done trekking around Pune as well and some challenging
[Guest]: treks, but many years before that. And I was like, okay, fine, let's do it. And then I
[Guest]: go and I, then the five of us get to the top of the peak by four in the evening. And we
[Guest]: had started climbing at around six or seven in the morning. And then what happens is,
[Guest]: so there's a funny story there as well. We get there at four o'clock and it was a very
[Guest]: difficult trek. The whole point of the trek was that once you scale the peak, you come
[Guest]: back to the guest house that the forest, the whatever the forest officers have set up for
[Guest]: trekkers and all that. And so at four, there's dusk in the, up in the hills and in the mountains
[Guest]: and it starts getting dark. And we were so tired, we were still up the peak. And then
[Guest]: there's a guide who takes you because there are wild cats in the area. And he, our guide
[Guest]: was like, okay, we have to hurry up. And once the light starts dwindling, then everything
[Guest]: that's moving seems to feel like it's coming at you. And we come down the peak and there's
[Guest]: a group of elephants and they start moving. And, you know, it's so different to see elephants
[Guest]: in the wild compared to just thinking of them as domesticated animals or animals that we
[Guest]: sort of understand. And this guide is like, we have to start running because we have to
[Guest]: at least cross these five kilometers of the grasslands of the forest. And then we enter
[Guest]: the forest and we're smelling the water, near the water, we're smelling the wild cats. And
[Guest]: I have never focused on running as much as I have behind that guide because it was so
[Guest]: dark and we were so sure there are wild cats behind us. But so anyway, that was a side
[Guest]: story. We did that trek, we were very happy that we did it in a day and not a lot of people
[Guest]: do it. And then in my office, there were some people who were forming a team for the first
[Guest]: urban stampede, which was a relay race where four people are in a team and each team member
[Guest]: runs five kilometers. And the condition is that there should be one girl in the team.
[Guest]: Now I work for a petroleum engineering company, which means there are fewer girls in general.
[Guest]: And so everybody is trying to hunt for a team member and a girl to join the team. And there's
[Guest]: this one guy who was on the trek with me and his friend in the company, who's now my best
[Guest]: friend, was looking for a girl to join. And then this person, Nidhan, who was on the trek
[Guest]: with me, tells Amit, my friend's name is Amit, that Shruti will run five kilometers, you
[Guest]: ask her. And at that time, I was a little bit bigger. So my friend Amit, he's from Haryana
[Guest]: and he's like big into sports. And he tells me much later, he's like, I came around your
[Guest]: desk just to see who she is, because I was a new recruit and they were senior to me,
[Guest]: so they hadn't met me before. And then he went back to Nidhan and he said, ye toh nahi
[Guest]: hai. So and then later he told me that Nidhan told him that agar koi 5 kilometer bhaagega
[Guest]: toh yeh ladki bhaagegi. And I had never done a 5 kilometer. I was not, I was a sportsman,
[Guest]: but I was not an athlete in that sense, not a runner or whatever. So Amit then approached
[Guest]: me and he was like, we are forming this team, do you want to do a 5K? And I was like, okay,
[Guest]: fine. And then he said, okay, next tomorrow we are meeting 5 kilometer, tomorrow we are
[Guest]: meeting at 5am and running 5 kilometers and I want to see how you do. And he's going to
[Guest]: be jogging with me and all that. And then he's like the first day itself, when we did
[Guest]: that 5 kilometer, you did not stop at all. You didn't walk for a minute and you had never
[Guest]: run 5 kilometers in your life. And that day I just knew I was like, okay, this is the
[Guest]: girl who's going to be in my team. And then I did much better when I practiced and finally
[Guest]: I did it. But that first 5 kilometers was me testing myself, that I am not an athlete.
[Guest]: Can I run a 5 kilometer or not without walking? So again, this was the first time I was doing
[Guest]: a 5 kilometer, but I didn't in my mind allow myself to say ki main chal lungi beech mein.
[Guest]: And I've seen this a lot with people. If you really can't, your body will tell you that
[Guest]: you have to walk. Why do you have to start running by thinking ki mujhse nahi hoga toh
[Guest]: mein chal lungi. So in my mind, that was the thing, that I'm not going to walk no matter
[Guest]: what. And I didn't. So this is how I first noticed that, okay, now I can run. And from
[Guest]: then on, I have improved. Every time I'm running 5 kilometers, I'm trying to do something
[Guest]: different. I'm trying to run differently. And there are many, every time you run, you
[Guest]: get, you have a new experience. You discover something new about yourself. The second time
[Guest]: I really pushed myself and I noticed something about myself was when I was in Dubai. Like
[Guest]: I was just telling you, I spent a couple of years in Dubai. And conversely, I mean, when
[Guest]: you think of Dubai or the Gulf in general, everybody is like bohot Indians hai waha pe.
[Guest]: And you see a lot of Indians everywhere. They're almost like citizens there, even though we
[Guest]: never get citizenship, but they're everywhere. And then I was in Dubai and I registered with
[Guest]: my team, with a team of my colleagues who were ex-New Zealand military. They were also
[Guest]: in Shell and they wanted to form a seven member team to participate in the Desert Warrior
[Guest]: back in 2015. And they used to, so Desert Warrior is 10 kilometer run in the October
[Guest]: heat in Dubai, in the sand with 22 obstacles. And that sort of test you. There can be slides,
[Guest]: there can be jumping over walls, there can be, you can imagine that. And I was like,
[Guest]: okay, fine. I was already doing fitness, but nothing at the level that they were doing.
[Guest]: And they were, these military guys were setting our workouts. So we would end up doing a lot
[Guest]: of really challenging workouts. And then during one workout, in 40 minutes, I had to climb
[Guest]: 92 floors of nine flights of stairs and swim about 75 meters or so, 100 pushups and a two
[Guest]: kilometer run or so. We were doing that in rounds. So we were, the gym of the building
[Guest]: was on the 30th floor. So we had to go down, climb 30 floors and whatever. And the idea
[Guest]: was that in 40 minutes, this is how much you can do the max. And you have to finish it.
[Guest]: And otherwise, we are going to stop the clock anyways, like nobody's putting pressure on
[Guest]: you if you didn't finish all the rounds or whatever, but this is the max you could do.
[Guest]: And I ended up finishing it. You did 90 floors. 92 floors. Yeah. And I still, it shows up
[Guest]: on my Facebook memories sometimes and I'm like, Oh my God, how did we end up doing this?
[Guest]: But so, so that's another time when I realized that both willpower and, and your ability
[Guest]: to do sport coming together, you can still do a lot of things. And then on the day of
[Guest]: the Desert Warrior, right? It was the first time in Dubai where I went to the spot where
[Guest]: the race was starting. No Indian, no Indian and no Pakistani. In Dubai, you will see everywhere,
[Guest]: but in this race, you won't see anywhere. The same with Thailand. I've been to Thailand
[Guest]: many, many times. And we, every time I'm in Thailand, we work out like four or five hours
[Guest]: a day. And then the day gets over pretty early. You don't see a lot of fighters and everybody,
[Guest]: you know, just drinking away the night or whatever. Maybe on a Saturday night, because
[Guest]: Sunday the school is off. But on the days, everybody's fairly disciplined and no Indian
[Guest]: again. Like I have, I've been there many times and you see one or two Indians, it's becoming
[Guest]: more popular to go there now. And sometimes I've heard some South Indian actors and stuff
[Guest]: go there, but otherwise I've hardly met. Poore Thailand mein itne Indians ja rahe hote hain,
[Guest]: but in the sports schools, you'll never see anybody. So during Desert Warrior is when,
[Guest]: when those military workouts that were set were sort of made me realize that, okay, I
[Guest]: can push myself in these directions as well. And what you learn every time is how much
[Guest]: you are able to push yourself. That learning was okay for me. Like I knew that I can push
[Guest]: myself and I'm able to sort of really, maybe I don't want to fail in a sense. So you, you
[Guest]: set those goals, all that was great. But when I went to Thailand is where I really, really
[Guest]: realized that you, first of all, you are in a company of hardcore sportsmen, a lot of
[Guest]: people from Germany, Canada, and a lot of them are fighters. And even the ones who have
[Guest]: a different career or whatever, have actually been fighting for a very long time, even if
[Guest]: they don't have fighting as their career. And you're literally like a tiny person there,
[Guest]: amid all these people that are like super fit. And you're not really unfit, but you're
[Guest]: looking at them, you're underestimating yourself. And then you start going to the classes and
[Guest]: you're like, yeah, whatever happens, I'm going to show up. And then you start realizing that
[Guest]: you're able to keep up with, with even, even if the level of the workouts is very high.
[Guest]: There are some things you can't do, but then there are a lot of things you can do. And
[Guest]: like I said, when it came to trying and learning even a little bit of the Jiu Jitsu or the
[Guest]: wrestling and Muay Thai that I have done, for me was not about me now picking this sport
[Guest]: up or something, it was about me constantly being courageous. Because you are bruised,
[Guest]: you are tired, you have, you're working out five or six hours a day, you are hoping that
[Guest]: your body is recovering. And those, those are the things that teach you something more
[Guest]: about yourself. And like I said, it made me more aware of our body in general, human body
[Guest]: in general. And the most important thing was also that it was the first time that in Thailand
[Guest]: that I saw women really push themselves. I had been doing sport, I had seen fit women.
[Guest]: And yes, of course, the women in the Olympics in India, and I'm not saying that Indian women
[Guest]: weren't really pushing boundaries. But back in 2016, gymming and all that really women
[Guest]: pushing themselves on, and you seeing them in gyms around you, all that was not as common.
[Guest]: And I go there, and I'm in like this group class, and there are women lifting 100 kilos
[Guest]: deadlifts. And I have, by then I had not even studied fitness sciences. So and I wasn't
[Guest]: into weightlifting. And I'm just looking at this with these women and I'm like, ladkiya
[Guest]: yeh kar sakti hai. And this is me who's been in sports being completely taken aback by
[Guest]: how how easily women were loading 100 kilos on the deadlift. And, you know, after that
[Guest]: one month in 2016, I was like, Oh, my God, I have just not tested myself enough. And
[Guest]: we've been to, I mean, in India, the only weights that I had seen was doing some dumbbells
[Guest]: before that. And then I think after I came back, I have every single time I have been
[Guest]: in the gym, I have really tried to push myself. Like I was telling you earlier on, I was like,
[Guest]: man, what do I need to eat so that I can lift 100 kilos. And I like in Thailand, I saw women
[Guest]: that lifted like 190 kilo deadlift. I haven't seen guys doing that. And I had just not seen
[Guest]: such strong women forget. I mean, they had six packs or not all that is different. I
[Guest]: had just not seen that kind of strength. I had not seen Indian women with that kind of
[Guest]: strength, at least with my personal. Personally, I had not seen it. You can see a Malleshwari
[Guest]: or you can see, you know, you can find out about the weightlifters or whatever in India,
[Guest]: but I had not with my own eyes seen it and it had such an impact with me. I was like,
[Guest]: Oh, my God, you've been holding yourself back for so long, and really not pushing your limits.
[Guest]: And so that fear of, you know, that women show in the gyms in India as well. No, no,
[Guest]: I will, you know, this is a deadlift, I will just try 40 kilos, I will just try 30 kilos.
[Guest]: And that's what I keep telling people who at least ask me about how they should improve.
[Guest]: I will tell them that, hey, just work on your technique so that you don't get injured. But
[Guest]: do not hold back from lifting more weights. And the high of just allowing yourself to
[Guest]: test your limits transcends into your work, transcends into what else you do outside of
[Guest]: the gym, because it builds your courage, your risk taking ability, your, in case of women
[Guest]: to some extent, the aggression that they need to assert themselves even outside of, I mean
[Guest]: even at work and outside of the gym. I think all that you use, you know, you learn doing
[Guest]: all of that. If you purely speak about learning from sport, I mean, I don't mean that these
[Guest]: qualities can't be learned outside of sports. But because we are talking about my experiences,
[Guest]: these are the things I learned. And I am quite grateful that I'm so greedy for experiences.
[Guest]: Most of, to be honest, Amit, most of the money that I have earned, I've spent in traveling
[Guest]: and gaining experiences because they stay with you. And like I said, when you're thinking
[Guest]: about how can I succeed or when you're not doing your best, there's just this whole bag
[Guest]: of experiences you have and it doesn't even take you a minute to find something that's
[Guest]: relevant to that situation. And so I completely believe in building experiences, just go out
[Guest]: there. Even going to Thailand as my first solo trip by itself was a courageous decision
[Guest]: because it wasn't like four day of Bangkok or something like that. It was booking 30
[Guest]: days. It was booking a hardcore fitness school. It was booking alone and just hoping that
[Guest]: you end up meeting people and the kind of people I met, oh my God, I would do that over
[Guest]: and over and again, no matter what country I have to go to get those kinds of experiences.
[Amit Varma]: And the fantastic lesson here is not just a sporting one, that lesson applies to everything,
[Amit Varma]: which is that don't make assumptions about what your limits are. Just keep kind of testing
[Amit Varma]: them and going outside your comfort zone. I have a running story. It's a slightly embarrassing
[Amit Varma]: running story, but I'll share it nevertheless. Now, around three years back, I was 25 kgs
[Amit Varma]: lighter. I was on keto plus intermittent fasting, like I told you, in which you're an expert
[Amit Varma]: in and we'll come to that later as well, your learnings on nutrition. And I was running.
[Amit Varma]: So I was running to a point where I would get up every day in the morning at 5.30, go
[Amit Varma]: out and run for an hour. I ran a 10k, have a photo of me biting my medal. Happy times.
[Amit Varma]: And one day I was in Bangalore for a bunch of recordings. And my good friend, Mohit Satyanand,
[Amit Varma]: who's been a guest on the show also happened to be there. And Mohit just turned 66 recently.
[Amit Varma]: And he, I think around the time he was 60, got into fitness and he's run triathlons and
[Guest]: all that. So he... Bangalore has a huge community of triathlons
[Amit Varma]: and runners. He's actually based in Delhi, but he happened
[Amit Varma]: to be in Bangalore at that time. But he got hardcore into that, ran triathlons. I think
[Amit Varma]: he spent some time in Greece because he was doing a specialist course in swimming, swimming
[Amit Varma]: techniques and all of that. So really hardcore. So I was chatting on the phone with him one
[Amit Varma]: evening and I was there for recordings. He was there for something else. And he said,
[Amit Varma]: Amit, I hear you're really into running. Let's go running tomorrow. So I said, okay, let's
[Amit Varma]: go running tomorrow. So he said, okay, 5.30, Kaban Park or whatever the time was.
[Amit Varma]: It's a beautiful park. It's an amazing park. Bombay people should
[Amit Varma]: be incredibly jealous. But anyway, so I did a 10K in Kaban as well.
[Amit Varma]: I was staying right next to Kaban. So I said, okay, so 5.30 I go there and he's there and
[Amit Varma]: he greets me and then he says, Amit, let's run. Okay. Now I got to set the scene. This
[Amit Varma]: is a moment where the camera kind of pulls back slowly and you're setting the scene around.
[Amit Varma]: There are something like 32 men, 18 women and three dogs in the vicinity. Right. And
[Amit Varma]: they're all doing different things. They're doing pushups or they're lounging or they're
[Amit Varma]: chilling or they're running or whatever. The moment Mohit starts running, they stop what
[Amit Varma]: they're doing and they turn and they look at him with their mouths open. It's like a
[Amit Varma]: freeze frame. For a couple of the dogs, the tongue comes out because a man is running
[Amit Varma]: like a gazelle. It is the most beautiful balletic thing I have ever seen. It is like an angel
[Amit Varma]: is jogging through the clouds. Right. It's like that. And he has just said, let's run
[Amit Varma]: Amit. So I have to go with him. So like an ungainly beast, I'm like, you know, kind of
[Amit Varma]: running behind him. And at some point I run out of breath and he notices and he stops
[Amit Varma]: and he says, okay, Amit, I have run enough. Now I will watch. You will run. So from one
[Amit Varma]: pocket of his track pants, he whips out a notebook from another pocket. He whips out
[Amit Varma]: a pen and he says, okay, run. Now I got to tell you at this point that whenever I get
[Amit Varma]: into something, I get really geeky about it. Right. So I have read every book on running
[Amit Varma]: that there is at this point. I have watched all the videos. I know my form is good. I
[Amit Varma]: don't land on my heel. You know, I have taken close up videos of my feet running and everything.
[Amit Varma]: I have like nailed everything. Right. So I'm assuming that there are no notes to take.
[Amit Varma]: So I run for a bit and I go back and then he's got some 32 points that your ankle is
[Amit Varma]: coming at this angle and so and so. And he tells me or he takes me through each of those.
[Amit Varma]: And that day I decide, you know what, I'm going to take a break for a week from running.
[Guest]: And then I never got back to it. Oh, no. I would have imagined that that sort of motivated
[Guest]: you. But yeah, that's that's interesting. Right. When somebody geeks out on you, what
[Amit Varma]: impact that would have on you? I'm actually partly kidding. I totally appreciate this
[Amit Varma]: way of going in depth and thinking about this thing. And it's actually a correlation, not
[Amit Varma]: a causation. I had a slight crick in my knee and I thought, let me rest it for a few days
[Amit Varma]: and I never got back. But this event happened around that time. But I swear to you, man,
[Amit Varma]: the way the way that gentleman ran and he's like a little taller than me is tall, slim
[Guest]: and the park just froze. That's amazing. I would I would I mean, definitely look him
[Guest]: up maybe if he has like a page or talks about his experiences. But these people don't have
[Amit Varma]: time to be to be active on any social media. He's got a lovely newsletter, which I'll link
[Amit Varma]: from the show notes. So I don't think he's written about his running there. But if you
[Amit Varma]: happen to be in Delhi, I'll introduce you guys. But let's sort of get back to your story.
[Amit Varma]: And let's in fact, chronologically get a look. But before that I have one running story too.
[Guest]: And it's really funny because it's not a running running story. When I launched my startup,
[Guest]: which was which which is like a fitness platform. You know how there is this compulsion of putting
[Guest]: these before and after pictures and you know, it's it's almost like a compulsion, you have
[Guest]: to do it, it doesn't matter if it if you believe in it or not. And I myself had a big transformation
[Guest]: at some point. And I had these before and after pictures. And then I made a very impressive
[Guest]: before and after pic where I look quite big in one and the picture I had where I look
[Guest]: quite big was a running picture. And it was again one of those urban stampede. I've done
[Guest]: quite a few of them. It's one of those. And then on the right side of the collage was
[Guest]: me who had become quite fit during my time in Dubai and all that. And then of course,
[Guest]: I put it and I launched my startup and all that is happening. And then one day I'm talking
[Guest]: to a friend of mine and I'm telling him, I'm like, you know what, this, this pic on the
[Guest]: left side when I'm doing this five kilometers on an urban stampede was my fastest run ever.
[Guest]: Like all of my friends could not believe I got the timing that I did. And I was at my
[Guest]: heaviest at that time. And I have just found this picture to pair it up with a picture
[Guest]: where I had lost a lot of weight. And yeah, I was doing I was fitter in other areas. But
[Guest]: if you really ask me, this is not a before and after story because I was very I was doing
[Guest]: very well when I was bigger and I was doing very well on the right side when I had lost
[Guest]: weight. So I do, I sometimes laugh about the compulsions that our jobs make us do, you
[Guest]: know, like, or our professions make us do, because you have to sort of make up things
[Guest]: that you have to let people assume things based on what you put up on social media,
[Guest]: but the story could be really different. But then sometimes when I'm talking to, or I used
[Guest]: to when I used to counsel clients for nutrition or so and sometimes I used to bring up my
[Guest]: own story because it helps them to open up when you've shared your own. That time I used
[Guest]: to tell them that, hey, you know what, I don't care the size that you are at, because it
[Guest]: is not a reflection of your ability, because you could have some natural abilities that
[Guest]: allow you to excel at the size that you are at. And so we need to find that we need to
[Guest]: find what is it that really gets you going regardless of your size. And I guess then
[Guest]: I would explain to them that, yeah, I mean, look at your fat loss journey as a fat loss,
[Guest]: but it does not mean that whatever size you are at, you are not able to perform, you could
[Guest]: really excel if you found what you like. And if sometimes we found what they like, then
[Guest]: they could focus their fitness journey on that, because you since day one, you have
[Guest]: the gratification of having hit your goals in that sense.
[Amit Varma]: So let me ask you a related question coming off from this, that I'm fascinated with the
[Amit Varma]: process of how people kind of get comfortable in their own skins, because we're always so
[Amit Varma]: sort of struck through life by the anxiety of what other people think of us and how they
[Amit Varma]: perceive us, which is largely pointless, because no one is thinking of anyone but themselves,
[Amit Varma]: right? But it's still an anxiety that is there. And it's still there with me, you know, every
[Amit Varma]: day, like, if I put on a t shirt, I'll be thinking about, you know, will my pawn show
[Amit Varma]: in this and why don't they have Indian sizes and all of that. So did sports make that process
[Amit Varma]: easier and not just in a physical sense of the way you look, but even at a sense of kind
[Amit Varma]: of who you are just being like, like, like, for me, I'm comfortable in my own skin in
[Amit Varma]: other non physical ways, in terms of the things I know, or what my accent might be or what
[Amit Varma]: my weaknesses might be and all of those. And, you know, but both physically and in terms
[Amit Varma]: of the people they are and the things they like and the things they want. I think many
[Amit Varma]: people find it hard at one margin or the other to kind of get that comfort with themselves.
[Amit Varma]: So how was that process for you? And since you counsel so many people, you know, and
[Amit Varma]: speak to them, how do you see that process playing out in others? Is this an anxiety
[Amit Varma]: that kind of needs to be fought? How do you get past it?
[Guest]: So first talking about myself, Amit, you just learn to deal with it. It's like I think it's
[Guest]: like you being in the field of acting or modelling where you have to, you know, you're being
[Guest]: perceived in a certain way all the time and you're expected to look a certain way, which
[Guest]: is of course slowly changing. But when it comes to sport as well, people judge your
[Guest]: ability based on how you're looking. I'd like I just gave you the example of me getting
[Guest]: into running and somebody looking at me on my desk and being like, oh, she's she cannot
[Guest]: run. And I went through that myself as well. And there are some things that are to do with
[Guest]: your weight. But then there are a lot of things that have to do with your height. What are
[Guest]: you going to do about that? I was in volleyball. And of course, if there are people who are
[Guest]: taller than me, who are competing with me in trials or so, then you do have a disadvantage
[Guest]: and you have to sort of get over it. Sometimes you lose out. Apart from that, when it comes
[Guest]: to being comfortable in my skin, I have cycles and I think everybody should accept that you
[Guest]: have cycles. Unless your money is coming from how fit you look all the time, nobody is a
[Guest]: hundred percent fit perineally. And in a sense, that is real. It's authentic. It's how it
[Guest]: is because your life goes through phases. Your focus goes through phases unless you're
[Guest]: a sportsman or whatever. And that's going to show on your body. And so long as by and
[Guest]: large you understand that this is a phase and by and large, you know that at some point
[Guest]: you have to make an effort to remain fit and happy. And if you're exercising for the endorphins
[Guest]: of it, like for example, right now I live in Berlin and the weather is very, I mean,
[Guest]: the sun rises at 4am. So many times it impacts your sleep. It's setting at 10 or in the winters,
[Guest]: the sunset is at 4 and you've not even started your day. You've probably ended work or classes
[Guest]: in my case and you still have a lot to do. How do you train your mind to be sharp after
[Guest]: that time? So I would now sometimes go and exercise because I want to feel really fresh
[Guest]: because I have a lot to do and not really because I want muscles or I'm, you know, wanting
[Guest]: to be very fit. So I think allowing yourself those phases is really important. And however
[Guest]: that shows up on your body. But the only one thing that I am quite cautious of is this
[Guest]: whole idea of blanket statements like be comfortable in your body. And I'm completely for body
[Guest]: positivity. And I have just given you many examples of no matter the size of the body,
[Guest]: you could have many things that are going for you. But having said that, there are some
[Guest]: very, very specific things that are related to carrying a lot of body fat or in terms
[Guest]: of not being fit. And to gloss over them because of body positivity or not having a PS statement
[Guest]: or saying that I'm comfortable in my skin is actually being very, very untrue to science
[Guest]: in that sense. I mean, it's important to be comfortable in your skin. But it's also important
[Guest]: to be brutally honest about your health, at least with yourself. And if you have understood
[Guest]: that, then reciprocate that in the messaging that you are putting out. So yeah, it's just
[Guest]: a minor statement on the side that waves about messaging around body positivity have to be
[Amit Varma]: also very cautious. And do you see this in the people around you,
[Amit Varma]: the people you counsel, the people around you and so on? Is it a problem that you see?
[Amit Varma]: Because part of my earlier observation about a lot of people not doing enough self-reflection
[Amit Varma]: is also this, that many of those people who don't do enough self-reflection are also people
[Amit Varma]: who are at some level not comfortable in their skin just because they haven't thought about
[Amit Varma]: it enough. And this just doesn't mean the physical aspect of it, somebody's too fat
[Amit Varma]: or too short or whatever. But even otherwise, people keep pointing out to me when I can't
[Amit Varma]: pronounce a word properly. Like I said, that instead of, you know, THAT, how it's supposed
[Amit Varma]: to be. And I'm completely comfortable with that because yeah, that's what I do. So what
[Amit Varma]: people know what I mean. But there might be other aspects where I'm not so comfortable.
[Amit Varma]: But I see a lot of people around me who are in a sense, pretending not just to the world
[Amit Varma]: around themselves, but even to themselves, that they are something other than they are.
[Guest]: Is this something you've noticed? I think, Amit, the larger perspective on behaving
[Guest]: like that is finding excuses not to face the reality, right? And I think this is a deeper
[Guest]: issue that goes beyond, like you said, beyond body positivity or anything for that matter
[Guest]: that you may think is different about you or the world notices about you, but not in
[Guest]: the most complimentary way. I guess it has to do with people not accepting that there
[Guest]: is, if at all, a problem or at least within themselves, within their mind saying that,
[Guest]: hey, is this a problem or is this not? And if your mind is going to accept that it is
[Guest]: a problem, then automatically, at some point, you're going to accept that you have to do
[Guest]: something to change it. If you're going to constantly avoid facing the reality, then
[Guest]: it could be your weight, it could be addictions, it could be anything that you want to change
[Guest]: at all, if at all, and you're not going to get to it. And I think that's why, that was
[Guest]: my thought behind putting the bell hooks quote the other day on Twitter, which said that
[Guest]: you have to learn to be solitary and happy in your own space, because otherwise you start
[Guest]: using other people as escape because you want distractions. And in that sense, your relationships
[Guest]: or your outings are going to be meaningless, because you cannot stand to be by yourself
[Guest]: in a room without any distractions. And that's true for all of us, to some extent for all
[Guest]: of us, because even if I'm sitting in a room by myself, if I'm distracting myself with
[Guest]: my phone, or I can't imagine sitting by myself without my phone and with just a book, or
[Guest]: if I am not going to be watching some Netflix, or drinking or something, then I'm actually
[Guest]: not yet in that zone where I'm comfortable with myself. And for many people, and I have
[Guest]: seen a lot of such type of people who constantly want to hang out with others, because they
[Guest]: just don't know how to be by themselves. And being by, let's face it, being by yourself
[Guest]: is not easy. Even those that are managing to do some of that, it comes with its fair
[Guest]: share of doubting yourself or being just bored out of your mind, or sort of going down the
[Guest]: rabbit hole of your own negative thoughts. It's not easy. But if you are able to sort
[Guest]: of face that and be by yourself, then at some point, the self-reflection, the acceptance
[Guest]: of the things that you want to change about yourself or not change, that sort of starts
[Guest]: revealing itself.
[Amit Varma]: I loved that Bell Hooks quote, so I'll just read it out for the benefit of listeners.
[Amit Varma]: Knowing how to be solitary is central to the art of loving. When we can be alone, we can
[Amit Varma]: be with others without using them as a means of escape. And that's a profound thought in
[Amit Varma]: the sense that it also, I think, acknowledges the tendency that when we are with others,
[Amit Varma]: we are playing a part. There is always a filter, there is always this consciousness of how
[Amit Varma]: we are perceived. Whereas if we are just with oneself, we are what we are. Like there's
[Amit Varma]: an excellent book I read by Seth Stevens, Davidowitz, which I'll link from the show
[Amit Varma]: notes where what he essentially did was, his thesis was that people are most themselves
[Amit Varma]: when a, they are alone and b, when they're searching for stuff on the internet. Because
[Amit Varma]: that's what reveals their true desires and what they really want and all of that. So
[Amit Varma]: he got anonymized data from Google, Facebook, and I think a bunch of others and wrote an
[Amit Varma]: entire book about what people are really like, what they really want, what they really care
[Amit Varma]: about, what turns them on and so on and so forth. So I kind of found that a very illuminating
[Amit Varma]: approach and obviously anonymized data. So there's another quote you posted recently
[Amit Varma]: from one of my favorite poets, Mary Oliver, which goes this way, quote, tell me what is
[Amit Varma]: it you plan to do with your one wild and precious life, stop quote, which is a lovely question
[Amit Varma]: that I think anyone of any age can, you know, pause and think about. And so when you look
[Guest]: back on your life and you I find it a very difficult question to answer.
[Guest]: I mean, the reason I posted it was because I was like, who is able to answer this at
[Guest]: what point? You can have ideas, but sorry to cut you off, but that was my thought behind
[Amit Varma]: posting it. No, it's a great question. And the reason
[Amit Varma]: I said that anybody of any age can think about it is that people assume that after you reach
[Amit Varma]: a certain age, surely you have answered this question. And that is not the case. Most adults
[Amit Varma]: are winging it, you know, adulthood is winging it better than, you know, when you were not
[Amit Varma]: an adult. So it's a difficult question, even for me, but to sort of use this as a way to
[Amit Varma]: segue into your past life. So when you were sort of going through school, and about to
[Amit Varma]: enter college, and you're, of course, playing volleyball, and you love sport, but you're
[Amit Varma]: not going to be a professional and you don't want a job in railways. And you opt for sort
[Amit Varma]: of engineering. What was your conception of yourself then? And what was driving you? Like,
[Amit Varma]: did you fall in love with engineering, which is why you did it? Or, you know, I just smiled
[Amit Varma]: as I said that, because I can't imagine anyone falling in love with engineering, but that
[Amit Varma]: is just my arts-wala bias, as it were. Or, you know, were you just sort of following
[Amit Varma]: a particular template that, okay, good students do engineering, and let me do this or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me about, you know, your motivations and why you did the things you did back then.
[Guest]: So to be honest, becoming an engineer was somewhere in my, in the back of my mind since
[Guest]: I was six, maybe. I'm not saying this because I feel very passionate about engineering or
[Guest]: to say that I was feeling very passionate back then. But I must have heard it somewhere
[Guest]: and it stuck in my mind. And that's, to be honest, I didn't grow up in my schooling days
[Guest]: thinking about, oh my God, what am I going to be? But like I said, because I got into
[Guest]: sport because of a few other things that happened that made me more, much more confident as
[Guest]: a person, that I think doing something good in sports or excelling in sport, in my case,
[Guest]: made me feel valued. And because like I said, I was not like a topper in class or something,
[Guest]: but then once you are a state and national player, you're valuable to the school. You
[Guest]: can see that the school, your colleagues, everybody knows that, hey, this is her thing,
[Guest]: this is her skill set. And I used to really enjoy that feeling. And I guess that's what
[Guest]: I sort of was chasing as a school kid. And then the rest of my 10th and 11th and 12th,
[Guest]: I guess I just wanted to do well, continue playing volleyball. And then when it came
[Guest]: to choosing, I had a brief moment in 11th and you went to Ferguson Arts and who is not
[Guest]: interested in Ferguson Arts. And with my background as well, there was a moment when I sort of
[Guest]: wanted to rebel and I took admission to science in 11th, but I wanted to move to arts in the
[Guest]: 12th. And like I said, my parents were always very supportive and they said that, okay,
[Guest]: if you wanted to really do it, you should. But I have to be honest with you, I came from
[Guest]: a middle-class family and I had absolutely no examples of my colleagues who studied arts
[Guest]: at the time, whose family was not very well-to-do. They were all absolutely very well-to-do and
[Guest]: could allow their children the choice to join arts, the indulgence. And to be fair to these
[Guest]: examples that I had in front of my eyes at the time, they were all extremely intelligent
[Guest]: people and later on were gold medalists in Ferguson Arts as well. But they had the freedom
[Guest]: to choose at the time arts and for people like me, we made peace with the fact that
[Guest]: arts can be done later on or you can join and change your field and all of that. So
[Guest]: I followed and then of the choices available to me, engineering seemed to be the most natural
[Guest]: for me. And the only thing that I knew when I was choosing engineering was I knew what
[Guest]: I didn't want to do. And it was to do with all kinds of IT and computer engineering.
[Guest]: And I wanted to do mechanical engineering and also at the time it was really more about
[Guest]: what felt interesting rather than me having thought about it in depth. And then with a
[Guest]: combination of a university or a college that ranked well. And then I didn't get mechanical
[Guest]: and at that time some students from the petroleum engineering department were living in my building
[Guest]: and they told me about this branch that only MIT offered. And what I really, really liked
[Guest]: about petroleum and I know the industry doesn't have a great name in this moment, but I wasn't
[Guest]: thinking about all of that. I was thinking about what do I like to do and whether it
[Guest]: will have prospects because you're coming from a middle class background. It's very
[Guest]: easy for you to have saved up a little money and sit here now in your mid thirties and
[Guest]: look back and judge your decisions. But for me at that time it was about what is unique,
[Guest]: what is creative. And petroleum was the only engineering course that allowed me to study
[Guest]: geology, which is anyway between creativity and science and also engineering subjects
[Guest]: along with it and mechanical engineering. Half of the first two years were mechanical
[Guest]: and I already knew I was interested in it. And then I was going to study geology, paleontology,
[Guest]: I was going to study fluid flow and that combination of and the uniqueness of petroleum engineering
[Guest]: is because all the oil and gas fields are hundreds of kilometers wide. No company ever
[Guest]: has enough data. There's only one or two wells that are drilled and you have data in
[Guest]: a certain radius. And then we used to have to build those 3D models with that little
[Guest]: data over 100 and 200 kilometers and extrapolate that data. And it's really a mix of physics
[Guest]: and creativity and imagination. And to then put it all together logically, I found that
[Guest]: very interesting about petroleum. And that's how I ended up joining it. Throughout this
[Guest]: whole journey, there was really no long term goal that mujhe ye banna hai, wo banna hai.
[Guest]: And continued to be very active outside of, I mean, in things outside of academics. And
[Guest]: then eventually all of that came together in getting a job with Shell, which was a dream
[Guest]: job because it was at the time the topmost company on the Fortune 500 in 2008. I would
[Guest]: say I thoroughly enjoyed that journey. I guess I've followed my gut all the time. What is
[Guest]: it that I'm really going to enjoy doing on a day to day basis, not in terms of principles
[Guest]: and all of that. At the age of 18, I was not thinking about all of that for sure. But on
[Guest]: a day to day basis, what am I going to do? And that is something that I did and I really
[Guest]: enjoyed it. Definitely, I think even my background with sport allowed me to take that risk because
[Guest]: petroleum in the petroleum engineering class, there were only three girls, and the rest
[Guest]: of them were boys. And, and people would scare you when you would make that choice. Rig pe
[Guest]: jaana padta hai, wahan pe ladkiyon ke liye kuchh hota nahi hai. And then you may not
[Guest]: be treated very well. And all these things, people would tell you and you still go ahead
[Guest]: and choose that branch and then you have a flourishing career afterwards. And because
[Guest]: I have had, because I was in petroleum, most of my life and most of my career, I have been
[Guest]: in, in rooms, meeting rooms and in situations where there's hardly any women in the first
[Guest]: place. And I guess because, because I came from the background that I did, I was fairly
[Guest]: independent and I was quite risk taking in that sense. And so it never bothered me. I
[Guest]: have never really, of course, I mean, I agree with the whole idea of women not being given
[Guest]: a platform and a voice. But if you put me in a room where I am the only girl sitting
[Guest]: with a lot of men, I would not find it very weird. Because that's the experience I've
[Guest]: had ever since I joined engineering. But yeah, I didn't have a very long term plan.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and I wouldn't at all be apologetic about the petroleum industry like you half
[Amit Varma]: were because it's one of the engines of the modern world. So, you know, whatever might
[Amit Varma]: be the case now and how situations may have changed. So post engineering, you said at
[Amit Varma]: one point you quit, you wanted to do your startup. And at that point, you also kind
[Amit Varma]: of went to Thailand and all this stuff happening. So what's, what's happening in your life through
[Amit Varma]: this period? Like you joined Shell, you were presumably, you know, how was that experience
[Amit Varma]: for you of actually being a petroleum engineer? And what was your relationship with sport
[Amit Varma]: through this time? And then at what point did you decide that you want to strike out?
[Amit Varma]: And what was it that you intended to do when you went on your own?
[Guest]: So when I joined Shell, in terms of sport, like I said to you, I did a lot of trekking
[Guest]: with the group that I had because Shell in India was a young company, they had just launched
[Guest]: a technology center in about 2007 or so. And the interesting thing about that was that
[Guest]: they were recruiting about groups of 40 people or so from these IITs and then from MIT Pune.
[Guest]: And they had only started doing that in 2007. So that means the whole building, I joined
[Guest]: in 2008. So there were maybe two batches before me. So the entire building was of the age
[Guest]: group of 21, 22, 23, which is very unique compared to joining an IT company. And then
[Guest]: there were a few expats who were in their late 50s or early 50s or so, and some Indians
[Guest]: who were brought in from ONGC, who were our managers, who are also much more senior, but
[Guest]: that number was very small. And so there was a lot of scope to continue doing sport because
[Guest]: we did a lot of running in those days, I did a lot of trekking. And I played a lot of badminton
[Guest]: because Shell used to book these courts for us. And we had a great group and I got really
[Guest]: good at badminton in those days. I used to play it since I was a child, but I really
[Guest]: I think honed my skill in those days. So continued doing things, participated in corporate tournaments
[Guest]: and things like that, but nothing like really, really competitive as such. But that was about
[Guest]: it. And then, like I said, in Dubai, I was with these colleagues who were ex-New Zealand
[Guest]: military and we participated in this Desert Warrior. So that's how it was, I was active.
[Guest]: In terms of career, so in Shell, I was a reservoir engineer. So what reservoir engineers do is
[Guest]: when a couple of wells, exploration wells are drilled on oil and gas fields and data
[Guest]: is collected. So initially seismic surveys and all are done and then these surveys go
[Guest]: to the geologists and another group of people called petrophysicists who then give us an
[Guest]: idea of what are the rocks, where is the oil found. And normally oil is found in carbonates
[Guest]: or sandstones and how the formation looks, how big is the field and what is the porosity,
[Guest]: what is the permeability, can we get it out. And then they make some models and then as
[Guest]: reservoir engineers, we had to basically use those models and model the fluid flow. So
[Guest]: we look at the viscosity of the fluid, the pressure under which it is, the saturation
[Guest]: of the liquid. And we have to eventually, if the oil field has produced before, then
[Guest]: we have to bring our model closer to what oil and gas it has produced before and then
[Guest]: forecast how much it will produce later and then come up with the number of wells that
[Guest]: we want to drill to bring that much oil out. And so our job was to find the locations from
[Guest]: our 3D modelling of how can we get the most out by drilling the fewest number of wells.
[Guest]: And then there is various challenges, there is fractures in the rock, there is places
[Guest]: you can't get to, then the types of wells you have to drill. And so that was mainly
[Guest]: my job and then I was looking at the business planning as well. I was in my last posting
[Guest]: in Dubai, I was working on the oil field in Iraq which is called Majnoon, which is currently
[Guest]: the world's second biggest oil field. Yeah, I pretty much worked on oil and gas fields
[Guest]: across the world. And then after having done that for 8 years in 2016, I was like, it's
[Guest]: time to move on. By then you, of course, think that you don't want to be associated for
[Guest]: too long, you're wiser, you've probably come to a point where you've sort of supported
[Guest]: your family, the things that you immediately needed your job to do as a youngster has been
[Guest]: taken care of and you're in a risk-taking position. And I was always interested in fitness
[Guest]: and sport and then, like I said, in Dubai I really took it a notch higher and then around
[Guest]: that time I had my start-up idea and I came back to India and then I decided that I want
[Guest]: to now quit. And I was about 29-30 then and I was like, this is when I'm going to take
[Guest]: a risk, this is a good time to risk doing something different. And that's how I ended
[Guest]: up quitting. I took about 6 months off and then in 2017 I went on to study sports nutrition
[Guest]: and personal training from the K11 Institute of Fitness Sciences in Pune. And then I launched
[Guest]: my start-up and it was a whole new journey because as a petroleum engineer I didn't know
[Guest]: how to build tech platforms and all of that. So then I started a new journey after that.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me about this journey of actually learning about fitness and learning about
[Amit Varma]: nutrition and so on because one of the things that, one of the rabbit holes I kind of went
[Amit Varma]: into was just how everything we knew about nutrition not too long ago was completely
[Amit Varma]: wrong. There are great books by Gary Taubes and Nina Teicholz and all that. I'll sort
[Guest]: of link those from the show notes and Jason Fung.
[Amit Varma]: I love those. I think Nina Teicholz is really good. Gary Taubes is really good. I was going
[Guest]: to gift you one of those books by the way. I didn't find it in Crossword and I didn't
[Guest]: have enough time to order it on Amazon.
[Amit Varma]: No, no, I have of course read them all digitally and you did give me a lovely book on running
[Amit Varma]: by Murakami. So thank you for that. I'll use that to inspire myself and one of my realizations
[Amit Varma]: looking into that was that for decades we have demonized fat and exculpated carbs and
[Amit Varma]: especially sugar and that many of the studies that blamed fat for many of the misfortunes
[Amit Varma]: that we go through like heart disease and so on were funded by the sugar lobby and these
[Amit Varma]: books have great details of the politics behind it and the economics behind it and the incentives
[Amit Varma]: at play and I think in the late 70s the US Health Association or some US government body
[Amit Varma]: came out with their dietary guidelines which essentially caused the obesity epidemic in
[Amit Varma]: America because they were like sugar is completely fine, carbs are fine, fat is evil.
[Amit Varma]: And today we know the opposite is true. That sugar is poison. As you pointed out earlier
[Amit Varma]: during lunch, sugar is like cocaine. It is a dangerous addictive drug and I have of course
[Amit Varma]: been on keto plus intermittent fasting a couple of years back and found the benefits of it
[Amit Varma]: and with your kind guidance now, though I started keto three days ago again before we
[Amit Varma]: met but you've guided many people into keto and I'll take your advice on this as well.
[Amit Varma]: But what struck me through all of this, through reading up on all of this and entering these
[Amit Varma]: rabbit holes was how the conventional wisdom on this is so incredibly wrong and therefore
[Amit Varma]: even when you speak with people who are professionals in this, whether they are doctors or nutritionists,
[Amit Varma]: they are actually giving you bad advice because they are practitioners who learned their theory
[Amit Varma]: at a time before the science changed, so to say, before we knew what we know now and therefore
[Amit Varma]: many of their ideas are actively dangerous and sort of wrong. And what I also realized
[Amit Varma]: during this time is that we assume that all of this knowledge which is in these guidebooks
[Amit Varma]: and government organizations, give it out into bullet point format and all of that,
[Amit Varma]: it has a ring of science about it. But the science of nutrition, it seems to me, is really
[Amit Varma]: at a very early stage. It's where, you know, other medicine possibly was in the 19th century.
[Amit Varma]: We don't really understand what's going on. And it's, you know, only with time that we
[Amit Varma]: are getting more and more knowledge of it. So tell me about your journey of understanding
[Amit Varma]: nutrition, understanding how the field had evolved, not just at the point in time where
[Amit Varma]: you actually, you know, take the course and start learning about it. But even before that
[Amit Varma]: as a sports person and so on, you've obviously been thinking deeply about that stuff. So,
[Amit Varma]: you know, tell me about that journey of just learning all of this.
[Guest]: So Amit, first of all, when I was in school and university and when I was playing competitively,
[Guest]: there was literally no understanding or discussion about nutrition. I mean, yeah, for sure people
[Guest]: would be like, oh, wazan kam karo, all of that would happen. But then nobody would tell
[Guest]: you what to do about it. And coming from like middle class backgrounds, we weren't really
[Guest]: thinking about, oh, there are nutritionists, so people actually go to them. Actually, I
[Guest]: think going to a nutritionist has become mainstream in the last five or six years, I guess. And
[Guest]: some of the digital startups are also sort of have helped that whole journey because
[Guest]: they made it more affordable. But so when I was growing up, there was really not much
[Guest]: knowledge about nutrition. There was just the understanding that, hey, you should eat
[Guest]: less so that your weight doesn't go up, you know, that's about it. I think after I studied
[Guest]: nutrition and the reason I studied it is because I wanted to launch an online tech platform
[Guest]: that did like video workouts and personalized nutrition and all of that. But for me, it
[Guest]: was about, hey, how am I going to know or understand the quality of my product if I
[Guest]: haven't certified myself in the first place? So you can think of it like an engineer's
[Guest]: mindset that, hey, I have to know scientifically how these things work, even if I can employ
[Guest]: other nutritionists or personal trainers, because how do I know the quality of my product?
[Guest]: Nobody could be telling me anything, but I'll have no opinion about it. So that's how I
[Guest]: started the course in personal training and nutrition. And thankfully, and the reason
[Guest]: I joined K-11 in Pune was because even though there are a lot of international courses,
[Guest]: there are very few that go into the scientific detail of nutrition as much as K-11 does.
[Guest]: And that is because it was founded by Kaizad Kapadia, who's no more, unfortunately we lost
[Guest]: him last year during COVID, but who I immensely admire. You can easily call him the father
[Guest]: of fitness in India, because he is the only person who went into so much depth of nutrition
[Guest]: in India and created a course that was highly, highly scientific, open to debate, that it
[Guest]: allowed us to understand why a keto diet or why some other diet, why something works,
[Guest]: why something doesn't. And so long as you're learning by asking why and getting a scientific
[Guest]: answer, I would say, regardless of where we are in our understanding of nutrition, you
[Guest]: are in good hands. But most often than not, people will not ask why. And for me, that
[Guest]: journey was, first of all, because I met Kaizad and I was convinced that he was a science
[Guest]: inclined person and not just somebody doing fitness courses. Otherwise, it wouldn't have
[Guest]: kept me engaged. So I learned a lot from him. He was the one who told us about the books
[Guest]: that you mentioned earlier from Nina Teicholz and Gary Taubes. And then we read those books
[Guest]: and Nina Teicholz is a health investigative journalist. And if you would want to find
[Guest]: out about proofs for what we are saying nowadays, then you go into these books. So there were
[Guest]: some things that were introduced to me in my sports nutrition course, but again, the
[Guest]: course is like six or seven months. So the questions that you have, you also try to answer
[Guest]: them by reading these books by these people. There is also a wonderful book that I read
[Guest]: that's called The Wheat Belly. And that literally goes into how the wheat that we eat today
[Guest]: isn't even wheat. It's like some 100-200 strain of some plant that has come out of sort of
[Guest]: experimenting with the original wheat plant, because we need to meet the demand and supply.
[Guest]: And the original wheat plant, for example, was five feet tall. And today, the wheat plant
[Guest]: is very short, because a lot of the produce was being lost because of the winds, and the
[Guest]: demand was growing. And slowly, we started changing how the wheat plant could produce
[Guest]: more. And what we have today is so altered from the original that we don't even know
[Guest]: if it is called wheat anymore, how many strains of the original plant are there. And so you
[Guest]: start reading all of this and you start thinking about, hey, what makes sense to me the most?
[Guest]: And if I'm going to convince somebody on how they should eat or how they shouldn't, can
[Guest]: I back myself up? That was pretty much my journey. And that's why I have gone on to
[Guest]: read these books. Because you're asking, especially when it comes to a ketogenic diet, and given
[Guest]: that there is so much information and misinformation online, you're going to have to really talk
[Guest]: to people and explain to them why you're doing what you're doing. And at the same time, you
[Guest]: want to educate yourself enough to let people go who do not let you function with your scientific
[Guest]: beliefs. Because you're going to have clients who are going to hold very strong opinions.
[Guest]: And you don't want to get into circular discussions with them. Because this kind of discussion
[Guest]: can keep going on. You can engage genuine questions and answer them. But for me, it's
[Guest]: like if somebody is coming to you with a religious or a strong belief, then they are not the
[Guest]: people you're going to try and convince because they have a certain belief system. This is
[Guest]: not to do with science. Then I'm going to be like, okay, follow whatever you want. If
[Guest]: you're a Brahmin or a vegetarian, because you are a religious person, then what is the
[Guest]: point of discussing science? You're eating a vegetarian diet because of that. So that's
[Guest]: fine. Then in my mind, I'm like, okay, that's fine. But I have a problem when people just
[Guest]: go on propagating diets, for example, vegan diets by just saying that, hey, this is healthy,
[Guest]: so I'm doing it. If you're doing it because you feel for animals, that's wonderful. I'm
[Guest]: not going to debate that. But don't try and say that, hey, this is a very healthy diet.
[Guest]: Because scientifically, it's very difficult to prove that with a vegan diet, you're getting
[Guest]: the kind of first class proteins that you need. And then trying to convince people that
[Guest]: pea protein is very good. I am not very sold on those things, because I just cannot stand
[Guest]: the scientific backing that these things have at this moment.
[Amit Varma]: Like I understand what you mean about there being no point in discussing something with
[Amit Varma]: people. And there's this lovely essay Paul Graham had written called the four quadrants
[Amit Varma]: of conformism. And one of these four categories was a type called the aggressively conventional
[Amit Varma]: minded ones. And you run into them all the time, right? And in this context, also, I've
[Amit Varma]: run into them when I talk about sugar being poison and how it's dangerous and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And these are people who would have been taught in school that fat is a problem, that dietary
[Amit Varma]: cholesterol is a problem, and so on and so forth. And that eggs are bad. I mean, there
[Amit Varma]: are actually people who have egg white omelets and think they're eating something healthy,
[Amit Varma]: but they're not eating the healthiest part of the egg. And there's no point arguing with
[Amit Varma]: them because what happens with people, conventional people, what happens with everyone is that
[Amit Varma]: we look for frames to explain the world. And for many of us, there is a frame we adopt,
[Amit Varma]: which is a conventional frame, which has been handed down to us, which could include things
[Amit Varma]: like fat is bad, or India's problem is its population, and so on and so forth. Another
[Amit Varma]: margin on which I face resistance when I say our population is not a problem, people are
[Guest]: brains not stomachs.
[Guest]: I completely believe that. I think population is a strength.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, people are brains, not stomachs. But again, I get enormous pushback. And the reason
[Amit Varma]: for that pushback, the reason aggressively conventional minded people exist, is I think
[Amit Varma]: aggressively conventional minded people, I love Graham's formulation here, are either
[Amit Varma]: lazy or stupid. Because once they get that get a framework that explains the world to
[Amit Varma]: them, they simply do not want to reconsider it because it takes intellectual effort or
[Amit Varma]: intellectual honesty, or even intellectual ability to be able to, you know, hold multiple
[Amit Varma]: thoughts in one's head simultaneously. And these are really the kind of people who irritate
[Amit Varma]: me the most on Twitter, who will come at you and be aggressive, with a completely conventional
[Amit Varma]: point of view, and think that, you know, they are independent thinkers of some sort, or
[Amit Varma]: they've really kind of figured it out. But that is a sort of a pet peeve I have. And
[Amit Varma]: let's not kind of go into that. But so when it sort of came to nutrition, you've pointed
[Amit Varma]: out your journey in terms of weight as well, you know, you have your before and after picture,
[Amit Varma]: and you also lost a lot of weight and all of that. So when you started learning about
[Amit Varma]: fitness and nutrition, at one level, some of it would have corresponded with what you
[Amit Varma]: already knew from experience, or kind of deepen that or back that up. And some of it might
[Amit Varma]: have been new to you and sort of challenged the way you thought about it. And then in
[Amit Varma]: the second category, I'm guessing that you would have said, okay, let me do this. If
[Amit Varma]: I am going to recommend this diet to other people, let me do it and let me see how I
[Amit Varma]: feel. So tell me a little bit about that sort of journey. And, you know, is that the reason
[Amit Varma]: for for example, weight loss or whatever, or you know, what was
[Guest]: No, so my my weight loss journey happened even before I studied nutrition. But that
[Guest]: was just me following another trainer's plan, exercise and then keep your calories, calorie
[Guest]: count and stuff. When I actually learned nutrition, then I realized what is the what are the functions
[Guest]: of proteins, fats and carbs in our body. And so when we say eat 1200 calories a day 1300
[Guest]: calories a day, now I don't talk in calories. Now I now I don't just don't talk in terms
[Guest]: of calories, I talk in terms of what is the quality of food that you're eating. So that
[Guest]: was a big change. Why am I eating a lot more fat? Or why am I eating a lot more protein,
[Guest]: I learned that I could have a low calorie intake, but and I could have seen becoming
[Guest]: fitter. But I could really optimize it if I knew that my my first class protein intake,
[Guest]: for example, was very low. As a vegetarian, I have to make extra effort, of course. But
[Guest]: so my learning was that that what are what are proteins, fats and carbs really doing
[Guest]: on my plate and for me. And when I studied that, and I started applying that on my fitness
[Guest]: routine, what then I started noticing was, first of all, you start getting a lot more
[Guest]: stronger. And I could see that happen in the gym as well. And I did end up getting to a
[Guest]: point where I was lifting 90 and 100 kilos. And if you looked at me, I look fairly lean,
[Guest]: not not a very thin person, but also built, but you can't see the muscle kind of a thing.
[Guest]: And you could see it when I'm exercising in the gym. And then I started seeing that I
[Guest]: could do new new things that people couldn't and people who look cleaner than me in the
[Guest]: gym, I'm, I was able to do things that they are not able to do, for example, pistol squats
[Guest]: or squatting on a single leg. So that came from my nutrition, but also from exercising
[Guest]: with pure science behind you. I mean, purely keeping science in mind when you are even
[Guest]: planning your fitness regime, and then backing it up with nutrition so that you you get you
[Guest]: see that that improvement. And so that was the difference. Initially, when I lost weight,
[Guest]: it was purely calorie counting low fat. And I mean, I was happy doing it. In general,
[Guest]: I was a lot more active. I was in Dubai. So you end up walking a lot. And I was very,
[Guest]: I was doing volleyball very, very regularly when I was in Dubai. So lots and lots of exercising
[Guest]: as such I was walking to work and walking back. So I guess all of that came together.
[Guest]: So I became fitter. But it's only after I studied it that I saw gains in that sense
[Guest]: of in my strength in my energy levels. So that was the difference a lot more educated
[Guest]: approach.
[Amit Varma]: And I guess that must be incredibly empowering. Because with everything else that I do, I
[Amit Varma]: like to understand why the output is related to the input that I am doing this and therefore
[Amit Varma]: something happens. And I feel for most of us with our own bodies. It is mysterious.
[Amit Varma]: We don't know what's going on in there. We don't it absolutely is. Yeah, like, I was
[Amit Varma]: diagnosed with type two diabetes last year. So recently, I got a continuous glucose monitor
[Amit Varma]: from Freestyle Libra. And I was trying that out. And, you know, and my intention was always
[Amit Varma]: that okay, I'm going to reverse this, I'm going to get back to keto and intermittent
[Amit Varma]: and you can work out more and I can, as you've told me, but what gave me the ultimate Philip
[Amit Varma]: to it was putting that continuous glucose monitor and just seeing that I have two slices
[Amit Varma]: of toast and my blood sugar explodes. And, and I have a wholesome meal of bacon and eggs
[Guest]: and lots of cheese. And I compared it, right? I compared it and my blood sugar didn't move.
[Amit Varma]: The needle didn't move when I had a full packet of bacon and three eggs and lots of cheese
[Amit Varma]: and the needle did not move when I have one slice of toast and the needle shoots up. Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And and it's so useful to be able to sort of, are you an optimist as I certainly am
[Amit Varma]: about this kind of biohacking? Because I just... It's not biohacking though. Keto is not biohacking.
[Amit Varma]: No, but I mean, things like CGM. So you get information about what's happening in your
[Amit Varma]: own body and all of that. Maybe I use the wrong term. I don't know what's a good term
[Guest]: for it. For experimenting with yourself. I mean, let's just call it that. Biohacking
[Amit Varma]: in general, it can be quite a, quite a rabbit hole. Okay. So it's a fancy phrase like blockchain
[Guest]: and so on. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, I guess biohacking is just you being open with your body and
[Amit Varma]: testing things on your body. I mean, for example, another thing that I do, which the aggressively
[Amit Varma]: conventional minded people argue about is I have Modafinil, right? I use it a lot. It's
[Amit Varma]: like, it's a cognitive drug. It's like slightly more advanced, the next generation after Adderall
[Amit Varma]: and so on. But I researched it heavily, went into Google Scholar, read all the papers,
[Amit Varma]: realized it was completely safe. And now I use it on days where I really need to focus
[Amit Varma]: and don't want to lose concentration, like today, because I have a recording. And I find
[Amit Varma]: it is so way better than something like coffee. Coffee is an incredibly blunt tool. And Modafinil
[Amit Varma]: just keeps your mind so alert and sharp, even when you're physically tired. And it's miraculous.
[Amit Varma]: But whenever, but you know, when I mentioned I'm using it, one in four people will say,
[Amit Varma]: oh, it is, it must be so dangerous and this and that. Sorry, carry on.
[Guest]: Yeah, no, by I mean, people who are not quite used to people who do biohacking or experiments.
[Guest]: And, you know, honestly, the people who are doing these experiments or who are biohacking
[Guest]: and testing it on themselves are the most well informed. And I know a few others as
[Guest]: well who have tested things on themselves, and they reveal things about their body. So
[Guest]: honestly, like no comments on that. It's like a personal decision that people find something
[Guest]: that works for them and probably research and convince themselves that it's safe enough.
[Guest]: But when it comes to, for example, a keto diet, I would say that it's far too established
[Amit Varma]: now to call it biohacking. I wasn't referring to keto, I was referring it to my getting
[Guest]: my numbers about my blood sugar constantly. Exactly. And then coming to measuring each
[Guest]: and everything. If you personally ask me, if you're generally convinced about the science,
[Guest]: you don't have to measure anything every day, if it gives you some sort of a kick to measure
[Guest]: it every day. And I would say I have friends who've experimented with a variety of food
[Guest]: items and tested their blood glucose level and they wanted to see. I'm sure at some point
[Guest]: of time, you would see that these results are not repeating themselves, you learned
[Guest]: what you should. There is about 10 or 20 items that you end up eating in a week or two, typically,
[Guest]: and you've tested all of them and then you've measured your blood glucose and at some point
[Guest]: that whole energy level will be like, okay, I know this. You know, at that point, you
[Guest]: can say that that glucometer has served its purpose. And it has taught you. It does. So
[Guest]: I am completely for you learning or teaching yourself in the way that that works for you.
[Guest]: Because I don't think that anybody is able to follow anything at all, regardless of nutrition,
[Guest]: but any plan, if they have not questioned it enough, if they've not tested it enough,
[Guest]: and if they have not grown their knowledge from where it was. And if I'm going to act
[Guest]: like an instructor, and I'm going to give you a plan that's in the dark, and I'm going
[Guest]: to be like, hey, just follow this plan. And then magically at the end of a month, you'll
[Guest]: have seen some results. But if you if somebody else was to ask you, Amit, you're losing weight,
[Guest]: what are you doing? And you're like, I don't know, my nutritionist gave me this plan. That's
[Guest]: the worst outcome. In that sense. So I sort of feel quite passionate about the teaching
[Guest]: part of nutrition than me writing a plan for somebody. Because it's easy to find a plan
[Guest]: on the internet. It's not easy to find somebody who you can ask all your questions and for
[Guest]: that person to be able to connect with you enough to explain the science behind it to
[Guest]: you. And I guess that's why we end up paying nutritionists. We don't pay them because they're
[Guest]: going to give some unique diet plan. And that's true for all famous nutritionists, everybody,
[Guest]: people would, you know, really pay, find some amazing nutritionists and be like, okay, I'm
[Guest]: going to pay her because I'm going to pay her 1 lakh rupees, 10 lakh rupees, 8 lakh
[Guest]: rupees, whatever it is, she does some magic. No, the body works on science. And she doesn't
[Guest]: have any magic pill. What differentiates one person from the other is who you connect with
[Guest]: the most, who your personality connects with the most. Because when then that person is
[Guest]: going to tell you what you should do, you're more likely to receive it. And when you're
[Guest]: in that mindset, then you're going to follow it and then you're going to see results. I
[Guest]: mean, that's my thought process about and then in terms of measuring, I think that the
[Guest]: first month people end up measuring however many things they can measure. But once they
[Guest]: start seeing some changes, then they are just convinced that all this is working and I'm
[Guest]: not going to measure as much. Having said that, I would definitely say that people who
[Guest]: are desperate to take fat burners, who are desperate to get on to creatine in the gym.
[Guest]: These people need some more guidance and that these kinds of things are definitely not for
[Guest]: everybody. And they are dosage specific and who can take them. For example, fat burners
[Guest]: that are coffee based are not good for people who have heart conditions. They are not good
[Guest]: for people who are on depression medication. And so when it comes to those kind of things,
[Guest]: I would definitely say people need much more guidance.
[Amit Varma]: And do you find people pushing back sometimes when you give some of this guidance because
[Amit Varma]: some of it would, again, as we discussed, be contrary to what they would have learned
[Amit Varma]: or even what their doctor would tell them?
[Guest]: Yeah, they definitely push back and the unfortunate thing is everybody who comes to you already
[Guest]: thinks that they know a lot of things. So you first have to listen to them. And then
[Guest]: you have to slowly start explaining to them. Some of them might have the right notions
[Guest]: as well. So you sort of say that, okay, these are the four or five things that I agree with
[Guest]: you on. These are the four or five things that I have a different opinion on, without
[Guest]: really saying that I disagree with what you believe in. And then there are some people
[Guest]: who will sort of buy into what you have just said. I have a very long process of going
[Guest]: into the science and I'm sort of trying to understand the people who've come to me
[Guest]: and their patience levels and their interest levels. Because if they are not going to be
[Guest]: in the mindset to learn, then there is no way I can write a plan for them that they
[Guest]: are going to follow or really connect with or whatever. So sometimes I let people go
[Guest]: as well. Sometimes people come with preconceived notions and then there have been times when
[Guest]: people have come to me and said, oh, no, no, but all this is fine. But then we know somebody
[Guest]: who gives this powder or whatever, and people have lost weight on that. And sometimes when
[Guest]: I see that they're too convinced on this, and they're trying to give you this example
[Guest]: because you're charging too much according to them. And then sometimes I tell them, okay,
[Guest]: no. And then invariably they'll come back to me in a worse condition three months later.
[Guest]: And of course, you don't say I told you so, but you did. So that makes your job even more
[Guest]: difficult in that sense, because they've now come back to you at a worse point than
[Amit Varma]: they were before. Since everybody listens to this podcast, they
[Guest]: just heard you say I told you so. I know I did. No, it's true. And I find difficult
[Guest]: this point very difficult when people come to us because people nowadays that are actually
[Guest]: making the effort to come to your office and pay you a lot of money to get a diet plan,
[Guest]: which perhaps is available on the internet, are actually coming to you for reasons way
[Guest]: beyond that diet plan. And those reasons are that they don't have anybody to talk to. And
[Guest]: the everything that's showing up on their body is actually a reason, is because of something
[Guest]: else. And your job is really to make them comfortable and allow them to tell you what's
[Guest]: bothering them. And I have had so many younger audiences, young adults who are on depression
[Guest]: medication. And of course, you know, their psychiatrists or psychologists have told them
[Guest]: that you know, start exercising, it will help you with your moods, it will help you to become
[Guest]: fitter. Maybe it allows you to improve your self perception. It's like these side activities.
[Guest]: But so this was the most revealing thing to me when I became a sports nutritionist, because
[Guest]: I did not know that I signed up to partly become a counselor. I guess I accidentally
[Guest]: got into it. Initially, I used to think that people are going to come and they're going
[Guest]: to be like, okay, I've tried so and so things and I'm really confused because nothing's
[Guest]: working. What is your advice, but it wasn't like that. So I've had I have had clients
[Guest]: who have come to me and said that I cannot speak to my parents about my desires about
[Guest]: my future. They're pushing me to be a CA, I want to be a filmmaker. And this is this
[Guest]: is like 22, 21 year olds, and that friction in the house is causing a lot of pain in that
[Guest]: relationship. And then the kid spends a lot of time outside, he's obviously depressed,
[Guest]: he's also consuming a lot of food as a like we said, sugar is a is a addictive drug in
[Guest]: that sense. And so it's not surprising that people turn to food when they are low. And
[Guest]: then the parents at some point say that, okay, okay, now I'm going to take you spend a lot
[Guest]: of money and take you to this nutritionist because you need to get fitter. And then you
[Guest]: slowly start listening to them and you start realizing that these people's problems are
[Guest]: something else, the whole exercise plan and all that they will follow. But the source
[Guest]: of their pain, the whatever is showing up on their body is something else. And how do
[Guest]: you sort of get through that person, tell them that, hey, I understand. But let's focus
[Guest]: on the fitness at this moment, and then try and build trust with them. And I have also
[Guest]: had, for example, a mother brought her her son to me two, three years ago, and he was
[Guest]: 24 years old. And he was some 101 kilos or something like that. He didn't look very large,
[Guest]: but he yeah, he could do with losing some 10-20 kilos. With most people that come to
[Guest]: me, I first say that I want to see your lipid profile and I want to prescribe them a few
[Guest]: blood tests and I want to see what's going on inside. Outside ka toh I can see. And then
[Guest]: when they came back with the blood test, I realized he's pre-diabetic and he's only 24.
[Guest]: And so I started explaining to the mother that, hey, this is what it is. I mean, he
[Guest]: really has to take care of his health now so that it doesn't turn into a full-fledged
[Guest]: type 2 diabetes and it's too early for this to happen and it's lifestyle thing, it can
[Guest]: be reversed, all this, all that. And after listening to me say all of this, this lady
[Guest]: says to me, listen, he needs to lose 20 kilos. How can I register his profile on this matrimonial
[Guest]: site because I cannot put 101 kilos there. And I want to register him. And for a moment,
[Guest]: I didn't know what to say to her because I was like, you know, honestly, this should
[Guest]: be the least of your worries. But then the guy was, I sort of became good friends with
[Guest]: the guy and he followed my diet plan, he lost weight and all of that. And he was quite excited
[Guest]: about it. But that's what I'm telling you, that there's such a disconnect between what
[Guest]: the children want, what the parents want, what there's such, there's the communication
[Guest]: between parents and children is broken right now and how. I had another person who came
[Guest]: to me, he was 16 years old. And casually while talking to me, he was like, oh, I take sleeping
[Guest]: pills. And casually. And I said, how do you have access to sleeping pills? And oh no,
[Guest]: I was depressed when I was in 8th standard and then my parents are doctors. So they said,
[Guest]: no, no, take this, this is mild and you'll get good sleep. And then I sometimes keep
[Guest]: it and then sometimes I take it. And I was shocked because he was just making it sound
[Guest]: like it's normal. And then sometimes you have to stop yourself as well because somebody
[Guest]: strikes such connect with you because they're not able to talk to their parents that they
[Guest]: think that their biggest problems or deepest desires can be shared with their nutritionist.
[Guest]: So this person comes and tells me at some point, he's like, no, no, I really want to
[Guest]: talk to you. And I was like, okay, fine. And then he was like, I'm addicted to porn. And
[Guest]: I'm just sitting there and looking like what did I mean, I'm a sports nutritionist. And
[Guest]: then of course at that by that by then you're experienced enough to say, hey, you know,
[Guest]: I will refer you to somebody. And of course, I knew some people that I referred him to.
[Guest]: But it reveals what's the problem with people. And a lot of it is communication. It's to
[Guest]: do with the fact that we are so intolerant, we are so isolated in the society today that
[Guest]: nobody has the time, not even your parents to really sit and understand from you what's
[Guest]: happening in your life. What is it that you're happy about? What is it that you're unhappy
[Guest]: about? Is there something they can do to help? But instead, a lot of parents would come at
[Guest]: their children with their desires. You know, the child's expectations or experiences of
[Guest]: their life are going in a different direction. And parents have absolutely no appetite to
[Guest]: understand their children anymore. And they have a lot of money to pay nutritionist. Ki
[Guest]: kisi aur ko aapka problem solve karne do. I will go pay them. I will take you to a psychologist.
[Guest]: I will take you to a nutritionist. All that is wonderful. And it's needed. I don't say
[Guest]: that parents should take things in their own hands. But in terms of understanding your
[Guest]: own children, it's just, it's an it's a non negotiable thing, I think.
[Amit Varma]: This is such a great insight about sometimes matters that seem to do with nutrition go
[Amit Varma]: much deeper than that. And I'm just thinking of
[Guest]: They almost always do. The people who have just, you know, just recently gained 8-10
[Guest]: kilos or generally are active, they are not the ones who will come and pay you. They'll
[Guest]: be they'll find some diet plan online, and they'll be fine with it. But the ones that
[Amit Varma]: come to you have a lot, lot of deep issues. No, and I just think of that kid whose mother
[Amit Varma]: wanted him to lose 20 kgs so she can put his picture on a matrimonial profile. And I'm
[Amit Varma]: just thinking that my God, if I was a young man, and my mother was like that, of course,
[Amit Varma]: I would eat pizza all day. Aur kya hai? You know, it's, it's, so here's a question what
[Amit Varma]: you've pointed to is both something that's forever been there, that is parents imposing
[Amit Varma]: their desires on their children and putting that pressure and so on. And, you know, not
[Amit Varma]: allowing their kids enough agency. And that's always been a problem in India. And also something
[Amit Varma]: that might be something that is exacerbated in modern times, which is that level of disconnect,
[Amit Varma]: where a young person may feel that she has no one to talk to, that there's no connection
[Amit Varma]: with the parents. And perhaps I can understand this friend could be with, this young person
[Amit Varma]: could be with her friends in a cafe, and they're all looking into the smartphones and not into
[Amit Varma]: each other's eyes and actually having a human conversation. So do you think that that specific
[Amit Varma]: kind of disconnect is a greater problem today than it used to be once? Oh, I absolutely
[Guest]: think so. Because, I mean, this happened, I was in a class of some 30-40 people recently
[Guest]: and in some lecture, they said that, okay, list down a few people that you are closest
[Guest]: to. And we would imagine that a lot of people will come up with five people that are like
[Guest]: really, really valuable to them. But not a lot of people have so many people in their
[Guest]: life that they completely trust with. And some of them have nobody. And I definitely
[Guest]: think that with youngsters of today, I think the fact that they have nobody to talk to
[Guest]: is one thing. But also, I think they're bombarded with so much so early, in terms of any topic
[Guest]: that they don't know how to process anymore. And that I think is a fundamental problem.
[Guest]: I think it was, to some extent, I find it good, if you have sort of a military type
[Guest]: thinking where you're like, okay, I do this, I do this, I do this, and at some point life
[Guest]: works out. But today, if you have a mobile phone at the age of 10 and 12 and 13, and
[Guest]: you're being exposed to so much information that perhaps you don't even need. I mean,
[Guest]: think about adults as well, right? People are finding it difficult to keep up with the
[Guest]: information overload on Twitter. And these are adults. And if you have given a phone
[Guest]: to children, teenage people who are on Instagram, what is their self-image going to turn out
[Guest]: to be? And then, because you have Netflix, because you have, and they have on average
[Guest]: more money than I think most of us had, at least the city goers, so they know how to
[Guest]: spend it to get instant gratification. They are not having to turn to each other to, like
[Guest]: I said, we were climbing up the Take D and then going and skating and all of that. I
[Guest]: don't think these folks are doing that anymore. And so, right from childhood, what are the
[Guest]: quality of relations you're carrying with you through your life? And the opportunities
[Guest]: to build those strong relations are going to only keep going down, because your own
[Guest]: effort is going to be less sometimes, opportunities are going to be less, or just because you
[Guest]: are not around as many people as you would like to connect with. So yeah, I definitely
[Guest]: feel they are disconnected, not only because of social media or so, but also I think the
[Guest]: quality of conversations, what's happening in the country, the fact that there's this
[Guest]: random mix of you're all going to good schools, but also schools are trying to put in a variety
[Guest]: of ideas in people's minds. I was just speaking to a friend of mine whose young daughter started
[Guest]: going to school, and apparently the school has said that we want equality, so we have
[Guest]: the same shirt and pant dresses for guys and girls. And now here I'm thinking that is this
[Guest]: an expression of equality that, okay, the girls will not have a pinafore and sash anymore,
[Guest]: is that an expression of, and then how is a pant and shirt for a girl and a boy an expression
[Guest]: of equality, if you're taking it from what men wear?
[Guest]: Why not a pinafore for both?
[Guest]: So, I feel like there's a mix of schools trying to try different things, and also sometimes
[Guest]: going overboard, I think. Because I remember when we were growing up, we used to, I mean,
[Guest]: I've gone to all these random places for my sport tournaments and stuff, and not once
[Guest]: were our parents really bothered about what's going on, they would trust the school teacher
[Guest]: that's going with us, and then let things happen. And they would just be like, okay,
[Guest]: this is your 2000 rupees for your 3-4 days trip, and go have fun. And also you're not
[Guest]: constantly in touch with them, you come back and you have things to talk about. Nowadays
[Guest]: there's nothing like that. What do you connect with? You're constantly connected, what do
[Guest]: you update them with? If you're going to talk to your parents, or your friends. So, yeah,
[Guest]: that's my general thought process.
[Amit Varma]: The Japanese have this lovely word called hikikomori, which is hikikomori are those
[Amit Varma]: people who, those young people who don't see the outside world. So they live in their rooms,
[Amit Varma]: and they might do whatever they do in their rooms, but they never come out, and the parents
[Amit Varma]: will often just leave food outside their door, and they won't interact, and they just live
[Amit Varma]: this completely solitary existence. The Japanese have a special term for it because those people
[Amit Varma]: are outliers, different from everyone else. And I wonder if you're all turning into hikikomori
[Amit Varma]: in modern times, and just thinking aloud, the danger there is this, that we can discuss
[Amit Varma]: two kinds of addiction, and one is the addiction of sugar, and the other is the addiction of
[Amit Varma]: say social media, right? And the addiction of sugar has outward signs, you know, when
[Amit Varma]: things are going wrong, first, you get fat, then you'll get prediabetes, heart trouble,
[Amit Varma]: blah, blah, blah, everything goes wrong, then you go to a nutritionist like yourself and
[Amit Varma]: tell them not just what your weight loss problems are, but all problems about your life, because
[Amit Varma]: hey, what are nutritionists for? But there are outward signs of that addiction. And you
[Amit Varma]: can figure out that, yeah, okay, this is because of sugar, this is how we fix it. But this
[Amit Varma]: other addiction, I don't know what outward signs there are of it. These outward signs
[Amit Varma]: are things that we observe in people like Jonathan Haidt famously said that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: even though you have all the knowledge in the world available to you through the internet,
[Amit Varma]: everybody's consuming what was produced in the last three days. It's one sensation after
[Amit Varma]: another, after another, after another. All day, I might read 800 tweets and forget them
[Amit Varma]: all by the time tomorrow comes around. Right? And the dangerous ways in which this harms
[Amit Varma]: us as people, which will also show up physically, of course, as you pointed out, there are those
[Amit Varma]: outward signs and those direct connections aren't there anymore. So I'm just kind of
[Amit Varma]: thinking aloud. But you know, is this something that sort of worries you? Because at least
[Amit Varma]: in terms of social media addiction, you've sort of stayed away, you are on Twitter. And,
[Amit Varma]: you know, many of the people you might read or see around you are like that, but you've
[Guest]: kind of stayed away. So what are your thoughts? So I think for me, Amit, the worst part of
[Guest]: social media is valid seeking validation. Yeah, that's literally the worst part. I mean,
[Guest]: you could, you could surf and you could see tweets and endlessly and yeah, I mean, you
[Guest]: don't want to spend as much time on it. But I don't. I mean, that comes sec, that is secondary
[Guest]: for me, as much as this validation, how many people liked my photo or didn't like me, how
[Guest]: many wished me birthday or didn't wish me birthday. And I can imagine that if adults
[Guest]: are also thinking about these things, then a teenager is really getting affected by it.
[Guest]: How many friends followed me, how many didn't, and then there may be young people's power
[Guest]: dynamics in it, whose boyfriend and girlfriend or ex-boyfriend, girlfriend follow each other.
[Guest]: And I guess, then that discussion must be spilling into their class conversations, in-person
[Guest]: conversations. And then what is the depth of those conversations? What, what, how do
[Guest]: you grow? Like when we were growing up, in the evenings, we would go for walks with our
[Guest]: friends, and that would bring up a variety of topics. And today, I don't know what these
[Guest]: guys must be talking about. And if they have, they already have access to phones and, and
[Guest]: all kinds of apps, then what, when, where is the time to talk about books? Where is
[Guest]: the time to read poetry or, or discuss a film that you've seen? So, you know, your, your
[Guest]: worldview is not being shaped, you're just being bombarded with information. And you're
[Guest]: having surface level conversations based on that. And then I guess at some point, the
[Guest]: realities of life just come at you. And then you feel like you've not thought about them
[Guest]: at all, or you are not slowly onboarded into what's coming. But that's my thought, thoughts
[Guest]: about it.
[Amit Varma]: No, and, and, you know, one of the other themes that hate talks about, and various people
[Amit Varma]: have spoken about, is there's been this growing rate of female teen suicides in the US. And,
[Amit Varma]: you know, hate and others link it directly to social media in the sense that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: a decade and a half ago, people were worried about what would happen to young boys because
[Amit Varma]: of video games. And as it turned out, nothing at all. Video games were good for young boys
[Amit Varma]: because I learned problem solving and all of those things, and it didn't harm them in
[Amit Varma]: any way didn't make them more violent. But what happened to young girls because of social
[Amit Varma]: media is that they became sort of slaves of this desire to seek validation, as you put
[Amit Varma]: it, like earlier, the girls would hang around outside school or go for walks, like you said,
[Amit Varma]: and they would talk about this, and they would talk about that, and so on and so forth. But
[Amit Varma]: now everyone's got an Instagram presence in there. And Instagram always, you know, doesn't
[Amit Varma]: show the real you, it shows a you that you want to project out to the world. And then
[Amit Varma]: everybody is, is making their real self compete with these projected selves of all their peers.
[Amit Varma]: And it is in that sense, a race into to the bottom race to a very dark place where you're
[Amit Varma]: always posturing, posturing, signaling, signaling, and, and a lot of female depression and teen
[Amit Varma]: suicides and all of that have been attributed to that. It's it's kind of an ongoing debate.
[Amit Varma]: I think there was an internal Facebook survey, if I remember correctly, which actually backed
[Amit Varma]: this up, but they suppress the survey, which is quite what you would expect. And that's
[Amit Varma]: kind of tragic. And then as you say that if it's going to show up in things like depression
[Amit Varma]: and suicide, it is also going to show up in what they eat and how they eat and their bodies
[Amit Varma]: and so on and so forth. So, so good for you, your market is growing.
[Guest]: Oh, my God, I trust me. It's not, it's not a pleasant thing. Because if we weren't dealing
[Guest]: with such grave and fundamental health issues, we would probably be discussing about how
[Guest]: science can advance our abilities in general. I mean, look at athletics, where has it gone?
[Guest]: I mean, how is Djokovic and how is Nadal able, how are they able to perform at the level
[Guest]: that they are at 34 and 35? I mean, we would probably be digging more into that or challenging
[Guest]: Djokovic on his water has power theories, if nothing else. But the other side of this,
[Guest]: I mean, this whole rising cases of depression are a grave worry, I guess, to the society
[Guest]: and then addictions. I mean, there's no end to addictions. Like, sometimes I think that
[Guest]: when we think about addictions, we are talking about smoking and drinking. And I'm like,
[Guest]: you know what, those are the known ones. Those are the ones that you've heard about all the
[Guest]: time. But sometimes you have to be truthful to yourself. And if I ask you, can you go
[Guest]: without your tea, morning tea and coffee? Are you going to be able to do it? Are you
[Guest]: going to be able to, as a challenge, forget if you're doing keto diet or not, give up
[Guest]: your roti and rice and dals for a week? We don't even know we are addicted to so many
[Guest]: things that we are. And we end up talking about alcohol and smoking, which are sure,
[Guest]: but sometimes it's better to know that these are addictions and get into it or get off
[Guest]: it knowing that they are addictions than the other ones that are the slow poison in that
[Guest]: sense. And which is why we are turning a lot of people are eating a lot of food when they
[Amit Varma]: are depressed, which is also an addiction. Yeah, yeah, absolutely wise words. And I see
[Amit Varma]: different addictions in myself, for example, you know, social media, for example, you know,
[Amit Varma]: and you absolutely like about valid, right about validation in the sense that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: the Facebook like button and the Twitter retweet, not so much the like, but more the Twitter
[Amit Varma]: retweet just incredibly toxic. So there was talk about how if Musk ends up buying Twitter,
[Amit Varma]: he might, you know, get rid of the retweet button, and he's not buying it as we now know,
[Amit Varma]: and they won't get rid of the retweet button because they want to maximize engagement.
[Amit Varma]: And that's what kind of does that. But let's let's move on to talking about positive things
[Amit Varma]: like you said, so tell me a bit about your startup. How did you conceive of it when you
[Amit Varma]: started thinking about it? And what did it evolve into as you eventually did your certification
[Amit Varma]: did your course, went to Thailand and had your experiences and, you know, beat up people
[Amit Varma]: box them on the streets, you know, demolished big men with tattoos into street fight. You
[Amit Varma]: got into street fights? No. I wish I had a story for you. I was hopeful, you know, something
[Guest]: for a moment. I've gotten into duels on during my Muay Thai classes, but nothing on the streets,
[Amit Varma]: really. Yeah, so tell me about your startup. So yeah, the whole idea about that I have
[Guest]: for my startup actually came to me when I was living in Dubai. And this was around 2015
[Guest]: and 16. And these fitness apps were really coming into the market, the online fitness
[Guest]: system, the whole app system. I had started following a trainer from the US called Jillian
[Guest]: Michaels because she was from I think what you've heard from me so far. You can from
[Guest]: that you can guess that I like trainers that are quite hard on their subjects. And she
[Guest]: was a trainer on The Biggest Loser, the program from the US and I had watched it a few times
[Guest]: and I was quite inspired by her style of training. And then she had come out with an app which
[Guest]: did exercise videos and some diet guidelines and stuff. And I started following it and
[Guest]: I was seeing a lot of progress. I was losing weight and I was really becoming a lot fitter.
[Guest]: But the only thing I used to constantly feel is that the food that was suggested was not
[Guest]: suitable to my Indian vegetarian preferences. And then I started thinking about it and I
[Guest]: was like, hey, I want to build something where the exercises that I'm suggesting and the
[Guest]: personalized food plans that I give with it are suited to the Indian audience. Because
[Guest]: there is no point exercising if you have no guidance on the food that you should be eating
[Guest]: and you're not going to see results with that approach that I will just follow the exercise
[Guest]: and I will eat what I feel like or what I know about. I will follow whatever I know
[Guest]: about fitness and nutrition. So I decided that I wanted to build an online platform
[Guest]: that has a variety of exercises and a nutrition plan to go with it for the Indian folk. And
[Guest]: so I built a platform which now has over 140 exercise videos and over 400 food items, each
[Guest]: of them broken down into proteins, fats and carbs and calories and further guidance on
[Guest]: whether we recommend that item or not. And so it's really a platform that I have built
[Guest]: to educate, I think, people more than just tell them that this is what you should do
[Guest]: to lose weight or so or to achieve your fitness goals. Because if you look at the exercise
[Guest]: videos that we have, and it's called Halomi Fitness, by the way, H-A-L-O-M-I, and that's
[Guest]: because I thought of it when I was in Dubai. And I was introduced to Halomi cheese there
[Guest]: and cheese is a healthy protein item and then I wanted to bring it into my startup. So that's
[Guest]: why it's called Halomi. But so my idea was to educate people and the videos that I have
[Guest]: there talk about if you're doing this exercise, if you're doing a squat, for example, which
[Guest]: muscle is it exercising, it has a voiceover that talks to you about the importance of
[Guest]: that exercise. And they are only 30 second videos, but they still educate you. And my
[Guest]: whole idea was that the the platform has a lot of tips on the on the questions that people
[Guest]: have about pre workout and post workout food. I mean supplements and all those things, including
[Guest]: the nutrition plan. And what I I sort of tried to do with my platform was even when it comes
[Guest]: to the nutrition plan, what people struggle with with the apps is that if we suggest something
[Guest]: to you, and you don't like it, then what happens? I asked you to eat something and you don't
[Guest]: have it at home or you don't like it. And so we provide a lot of replacement options
[Guest]: as well. So so that nobody feels like, hey, I'm cornered. You're asking me to eat this
[Guest]: and I don't have it. So people have found that useful as well. And I've, I launched
[Guest]: it in 2018. And it's completely bootstrapped at the moment. And at some point, hopefully,
[Guest]: I will raise funding for it. But what I have found with people is the best thing that you
[Guest]: can provide people is a plan to follow because a lot of people have the motivation to exercise.
[Guest]: But what's the most tiring part is to to get out there and start thinking now what should
[Guest]: I do? And if you solve that problem for people that hey, don't think just wear your your
[Guest]: your fitness gear, and you have a plan that you need to follow. So this is really for
[Guest]: people who find who understand that they have to be fit, who are willing to put in the work,
[Guest]: but who are like, hey, I it matters to me that I know that I'm following something that
[Guest]: is optimized for me. And then I will fully trust it. And I will open the app and I don't
[Guest]: mind looking at it and following it. So this is really for those people who are aware but
[Guest]: who want to be guided. So that's what my app, a web app, we have a web app. So you have
[Guest]: to go through it's like a website, basically. And that's what we're trying to do, educate
[Guest]: people and let them ask us questions, if they have any. And hopefully they carry forward
[Guest]: all the learning that they've had at the end of the program. Because if we have not taught
[Guest]: them enough, then we have not won with them. For us winning is is not that you have now
[Guest]: lost weight or whatever, but you feel confident about what you've learned. If I have, if I
[Guest]: ask you later on, how does paneer help you or so, you should have an opinion about it.
[Guest]: If I ask you to tell me a little bit more about rice or so you should have learned something
[Guest]: in those two, three months with us. And only then I can be sure that I've changed something
[Guest]: fundamentally in how you will lead in your life. So that that's the whole idea.
[Amit Varma]: No, that's great. And you asked a hypothetical question, how will paneer help you and I instantly
[Amit Varma]: thought of Siddhant Vadukut. Those who know him will know what I mean. You know what I
[Amit Varma]: kind of like about that approach, like even when I teach my writing course, for example,
[Amit Varma]: the very first thing I talk about is that I am not going to give you a dogmatic list
[Amit Varma]: of do's and don'ts, like don't use adverbs, don't use cliches, all of that. The 10 commandments
[Amit Varma]: of bad writing according to Sri Sri Amit Verma, as it were. But instead, just talk about first
[Amit Varma]: principles and build from there. So ultimately, you become your own mentor and you become
[Amit Varma]: your own coach. And you know, you might still need other people to talk to and to drive
[Amit Varma]: you. But intellectually, at least you know you're able to. Much in the same way as you
[Amit Varma]: know, a good chess coach won't make you mug up moves, d4, d5, c4, queen's gambit, but
[Amit Varma]: will instead teach you basic principles like space is important, occupy the center or initiative
[Amit Varma]: is important. So develop your pieces. And I kind of love that approach and try to build
[Amit Varma]: it in everything that I do. And with the help of your site, maybe I'll learn a little bit
[Amit Varma]: more and become more of my own sort of coach. So where did sort of the MBA then come about
[Amit Varma]: in your personal journey? Because like number one, I'm interested that you chose to do a
[Amit Varma]: bootstrap startup in an age where everyone is raising funding and trying to be the next
[Amit Varma]: unicorn and blah, blah, blah, which is a route you could have kind of taken. So why that
[Amit Varma]: sort of stripped down choice that no bootstrap, I'll spend my own money, I'll do it on my
[Guest]: own and you know. So first of all, Amit, I didn't come from a tech background, I came
[Guest]: from an engineering background, but that's petroleum engineering. And so when I decided
[Guest]: to do to go ahead and do the startup, I had to start bottoms up. And you know, I had to
[Guest]: start by becoming a certified personal trainer and a nutritionist so that I don't put out
[Guest]: something that I'm not confident about. And at the same time, I had to learn about what
[Guest]: it is like to build an app, a web app and interactive platform. I had apps, I don't
[Guest]: come from a family where anybody does a business or has done a business, forget startup. So
[Guest]: I guess initially I said, hey, I'm going to show people that I have skin in the game.
[Guest]: I'm serious about what I'm talking about. Because if you really think about startups
[Guest]: and if people end up telling you, oh, but I quit my job to do my startup, that's enough
[Guest]: proof of my seriousness. I would say that's, that's bullshit, because tomorrow you might
[Guest]: take up another job. But when somebody has invested their hard-earned money into starting
[Guest]: something regardless of how successful it is, that shows that they have skin in the
[Guest]: game, that they're very, very serious, that they're willing to bet their money on something
[Guest]: that they feel passionate about. And so that's, that's the reason I said, hey, I don't want
[Guest]: anybody's interference. This is my own learning. This is all my journey. And when I was starting
[Guest]: to work on my platform, also, I was still doing my courses and certification and everything
[Guest]: and I really didn't think I had enough to convince an investor to come on board. Of
[Guest]: course, I would have had some friends who would have invested and who may still, but
[Guest]: because I could at the time support myself, I went into it. And the reason later on, I
[Guest]: decided to do an MBA was because being an engineer, I'm crazy for optimizing things.
[Guest]: And while it was a long and steep and very, very fulfilling journey to actually get something
[Guest]: made and then launch it, I was, I was very upset that I sometimes I was eating, you know,
[Guest]: with my, you know, having my, my arm wrapped around my head and bringing the food to my
[Guest]: mouth on through the long pathways. And it was starting to worry, worry me a little bit
[Guest]: because I was thinking constantly when I was trying to implement marketing strategies or
[Guest]: do something or negotiate with somebody over some service, I was constantly feeling like,
[Guest]: hey, I really feel there is, there is a, there is a better way of doing this. And I did not
[Guest]: have any networks or connections in the startup world in India at the time. And so I said,
[Guest]: hey, I want to form a network. The next time I have a question, I want to have a few people
[Guest]: I can shoot emails to and say, hey, this is my problem. I want you to spend time with
[Guest]: me because I had only started, I started the company by myself. I didn't start with a co-founder.
[Guest]: So in that sense, there wasn't anybody to bounce off ideas with because you are trying
[Guest]: to be very meticulous when you're putting your money into building the platform, building
[Guest]: the product, everything is in your control. In that sense, you have set a goal on, on
[Guest]: the date that you want to launch something. And I'm very, very particular about, I see
[Guest]: a lot of people launching a lot of things now and you, they'll put it on Twitter and
[Guest]: then you click on that platform and then you see a spelling mistake. And then I'm like,
[Guest]: oh my God, I would never be able to take that. So I'm trying, in that sense, I have a bit
[Guest]: of an OCD. But you, that all is in your control. But once you have launched your platform and
[Guest]: now when customers are starting to interact with it, then in that sense, you have sort
[Guest]: of given it in their hands now. And then the predictability of everything reduces. You
[Guest]: can try different things and you may not have answers to how people are reacting, not only
[Guest]: to your product, but also your marketing strategies. I decided that, hey, this is something that
[Guest]: I want to learn. I want to learn how I can optimize how I am working before I put in
[Guest]: much more money into it. And I want to sort of be in the right circles so that I don't
[Guest]: constantly question myself. And while that is going to continue to happen, I guess now
[Guest]: I will come, I have a bit more of a network that I trust and that knows that I can contact
[Guest]: them at any point and ask them these questions. So it wasn't really about raising money in
[Guest]: that sense for me early on, but about me starting to become more and more comfortable with running
[Guest]: a business. I guess that's how I decided to do an MBA.
[Amit Varma]: That's a fascinating journey from running to running a business. And you've pointed
[Amit Varma]: out earlier about how you've taken up so many different kinds of challenges like running
[Amit Varma]: 92 floors and 100 pushups and all of that in just 40 minutes and all that. But did anything
[Amit Varma]: prepare you for a marathon scene in the unseen podcast recording?
[Guest]: Oh my God, this is going to be one of the stories that I'm going to tell in some other
[Guest]: podcast that this is also me testing my limits. I'm talking about myself. I mean, I guess
[Guest]: few people, honestly, I mean, I think few people get a chance to talk about their story
[Guest]: in this depth. And so, I mean, I have to thank you for delving so deep into your guest stories
[Guest]: and really uncovering what sort of keeps them up at night in that sense, both in terms of
[Guest]: what excites them, but also what bothers them.
[Amit Varma]: No, we are not done yet. But we are almost done. You've been very kind with your time
[Amit Varma]: and I don't want to push this too far. But my final bunch of questions deal around asking
[Amit Varma]: you to give advice. And you said you don't like giving Gyan on Twitter. Well, now you
[Amit Varma]: can give Gyan on the seen and unseen. And we can begin with advice for women. Like one
[Amit Varma]: of the themes that concerns you and that you wrote about in the note that you sent me earlier
[Amit Varma]: also is about the importance of sport in women's lives, the common health issues that women
[Amit Varma]: face, and also what I was struck by, quote, women's general mentality with regards to
[Amit Varma]: age and the ability of their bodies, stop quote. And I think in general, when you look
[Amit Varma]: at gender, women in India, especially, seem to just basically accept a role that is given
[Amit Varma]: to them and not exercise enough of their agency, which in most cases they can't, but even when
[Amit Varma]: they can, they're kind of mentally suppressed in a way that no, this is what I am. This
[Amit Varma]: is my role. These are my limits, and so on and so forth. And I guess that through your
[Amit Varma]: journey, both with sport, both with nutrition, you know, you've kind of not just gone beyond
[Amit Varma]: your own limits and all of that. But also, you know, would you would have a lot of advice
[Amit Varma]: to women who are listening to this, for example, about, you know, about all of these things.
[Guest]: So what are your thoughts? So, yeah, you're absolutely right. I do feel
[Guest]: very strongly about women stopping themselves from finding out more about themselves. So
[Guest]: I think it's very easy for us to, and valid, all valid, for us to say that we live in a
[Guest]: patriarchal society, and there's a lot of gender bias and all of that. But if you start
[Guest]: talking a little bit about solutions that are more in your circle of influence and more
[Guest]: about things, start talking about things that you can do. I would say the first and foremost
[Guest]: is I would start saying that forget what's your age and try and do the things that you
[Guest]: have wanted to do, whatever is on your bucket list. And if you want to do anything at all,
[Guest]: where you have told yourself that, I think I'm too old for it. I mean, I would say go
[Guest]: and do that exact thing. Whether it is lifting weights, whether it is some trip that you
[Guest]: want to take, some solo travel, whatever it is, I would say that is so important to your
[Guest]: further growth. I would say that's stopping you then. If there is anything at all that
[Guest]: you've given yourself an excuse for, and that excuse is your age, then I would say that's
[Guest]: the exact and the first thing you should do tomorrow or as soon as you can. So that would
[Guest]: be my advice. And think about it. If you look at women in the gym as well, I mean, there
[Guest]: are men on the leg press in the gym where you're trying to push a plate basically and
[Guest]: working your quadriceps. There are men who will sit on top of the place where you add
[Guest]: weights because there's not enough plates in the gym. And then this gym dude who's being
[Guest]: so very masculine and everybody else who's pumping him up are trying to add weight and
[Guest]: show him that, oh, you can lift 200 kilos, 300 kilos. And he's basically doing all these
[Guest]: half reps that from a personal trainer and a science point of view are just stupid. But
[Guest]: they know all of this, but all of them gather together, pump each other's egos up. And even
[Guest]: though they are doing some shit reps, they all come off it boasting about it. Oh, I did
[Guest]: 200 kilos today. I did 300 kilos today. And nobody's really asking them if you really
[Guest]: did the exercise properly or not. It doesn't matter. And then on the other hand, you look
[Guest]: at women who are able to do things or who are not even asking anybody for help in the
[Guest]: gym. These gym dudes have like groups that are helping pump them up. And here's women
[Guest]: who've already sort of told themselves that I'm not going to go ask for help because sometimes
[Guest]: you want somebody to sort of come pump you up a little bit. And then you do an exercise
[Guest]: properly or so and you're and somebody says, oh, my God, you are really good. Oh, I don't
[Guest]: I, you know, I think maybe accidentally or I don't know. So you'd give all kinds of excuses
[Guest]: apart from boasting about what you just did. So in general, I think on a different note,
[Guest]: I have to say I really, really, really admire women who can talk about themselves with pride
[Guest]: without making it look like they're boasting about themselves. Because I think that's a
[Guest]: skill and not a lot of women are able to do it. I am not able to do it myself as well
[Guest]: as I would like to. Because women just don't know how to promote themselves, how to be
[Guest]: proud of their own achievements. And on the other hand, men, even if they don't have a
[Guest]: real achievement to boast about, will just gang up and then prop each other up and say
[Guest]: that okay, you've done so well. And sometimes it works. Sometimes you have to fake it till
[Guest]: you make it. And women who are even making it or even doing it are not boasting about
[Guest]: it. So yeah, I do think that's my advice to women that, first of all, do the things that
[Guest]: you have kept on the back burner for a very long time. And now you feel you're too old
[Guest]: to do. I know a number of women who started lifting weights at the age of 37 and 38 and
[Guest]: have won medals in the Commonwealth Games. But I also know a lot of women who are way
[Guest]: past their 50s and are much fitter than me, are doing much better than me, who's much
[Guest]: younger to them. And also, if you really take a look at my experience, when I started running
[Guest]: that five kilometres that I did back in 2010, I used to look at some of my seniors who were
[Guest]: four or five years elder than me. And I was maybe 22 that time and they were 27, 28. And
[Guest]: I used to think, Oh, my God, she's 27, 28. And she's still running 5k and doing so well.
[Guest]: Then I turned 27, 28. And I was doing really well. And I was looking at people who were
[Guest]: 32, 33. And oh, my God, she's 32, 33. She's doing so well. Then I turned 30 to 33. And
[Guest]: I was still able to do it. And now I look at women who are maybe 40 and be like, Oh,
[Guest]: my God, they're so fit. So what does that prove that that just means that age is just
[Guest]: a number so long as you are able to put in the work. And, and that's, that's pretty much
[Guest]: my advice to women like learn to sort of talk about your, your achievements with a lot more
[Guest]: pride and, and go do all the things that you put on the back burner.
[Amit Varma]: That's fantastic advice, even for men. And that also speaks to what you were saying before
[Amit Varma]: the show started, that you've noticed so many women guests who come on the show will say
[Amit Varma]: that Oh, what's interesting about my story, or Oh, Amit, please stop me if I digress too
[Amit Varma]: much. And even you did that once or twice during this and the men never do that. And,
[Amit Varma]: and you're right. And that sort of lack of confidence is sort of infuriating. I think
[Amit Varma]: I've referred in a previous episode to this study I'd read about confidence that a company
[Amit Varma]: apparently tried to stress with this internal workers where it brought out this, where it
[Amit Varma]: advertises job opening and said, these are the 10 qualities we need. And the women simply
[Amit Varma]: would not apply unless they met nine or 10 of those, while a man he meets four or five,
[Amit Varma]: he will apply Bindas, you know, and, and this is a problem. And to an extent,
[Guest]: I've noticed that I've been a victim of that myself. Sometimes women take everything too
[Guest]: seriously. And if somebody says, okay, you know, you need these 10 things to apply, and
[Guest]: they are literally trying to match everything one to one. And then there's something that's
[Guest]: not matching, and then they're so worried about it. I guess that's how we are.
[Amit Varma]: And we can change, which is, I think these words of yours might be so inspiring that
[Amit Varma]: the Tiger Academy in Phuket will suddenly find all kinds of Indian women are landing
[Guest]: up what is happening. Why has it happened?
[Guest]: That would be so good. Yeah, I would, I would be the first one to go watch all these Indian
[Guest]: women really push themselves there against all the, the apparently stronger looking German
[Guest]: and Canadian and other women, Australian, because I, I'm very curious every, every time
[Guest]: I see women pushing themselves, because everybody's bodies look different. But that is not a reflection
[Guest]: of what their ability is. So as, as somebody who's watching, it becomes a very interesting
[Guest]: thing. So yeah, I'd be the first one to go watch the spectacle.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. And I can imagine a potbellied Indian man also landing up at the Tiger Academy in
[Amit Varma]: Phuket and refusing to, and refusing to pay. And when they ask him, why are you refusing
[Amit Varma]: to pay? He'll say, this is in Phuket. I had to do one of those. It's sort of, okay. So
[Amit Varma]: now the second of three categories of advice, and this is advice for people like me, who've
[Amit Varma]: never engaged seriously with something like fitness or sport or whatever, and who in the
[Amit Varma]: abstract love the idea of being fit and being sporty, but in the concrete have never done
[Amit Varma]: anything about it. And, and you know, people like me would then argue that, look, I mean,
[Amit Varma]: I have to sit in front of my laptop all the time. And where is the time? Actually, I can't
[Amit Varma]: argue that because I'm fortunate enough to control a lot of my time. But most office
[Amit Varma]: going people would say that, you know, we have so many responsibilities, ghar dekhna
[Amit Varma]: hai, office dekhna hai, time hi nahi milta exercise ke liye, kaise kare, kya kare, sports
[Amit Varma]: matlab, what do you mean sports, kahan khele, kya khele. So what's your advice to these
[Amit Varma]: kind of people, not necessarily on what specific to do, because that obviously depends on circumstances
[Amit Varma]: and all that. But just in terms of mindset, that how should we think about fitness? How
[Guest]: should we think about our bodies? So Amit, first and foremost, I think everybody who
[Guest]: says ki, arre main toh shyaam ko badminton khelta hu, I would first like to tell people
[Guest]: that doing sport and doing fitness are two different things. And sport is where you're
[Guest]: learning a certain skill, and then you're participating in the sport itself, but you
[Guest]: already need to be fit to perform in the sport. So fitness and sport are different. If somebody,
[Guest]: I mean, yeah, if you're active, it's still better than nothing. But if you're trying
[Guest]: to achieve a certain fitness goal, and then do that through playing volleyball or basketball
[Guest]: or whatever your sport is, that's not going to happen. So you cannot say that, okay, I've
[Guest]: been playing badminton so regularly, and still I don't see anything. So you need to find
[Guest]: time for fitness. And I agree that sometimes it's not that you don't have time in your
[Guest]: day, but sometimes you don't have the mental space. And I would say that even 15 minutes
[Guest]: of really committed exercise, but every single day, and when you're really pushing yourself
[Guest]: can do wonders for people. And I don't see why 15 minutes should be difficult for anybody
[Guest]: at all. So I would say start with 15 minutes if that's very, if going to the gym and lifting
[Guest]: weights and all that seems too much for you right now, start with 15 minutes, but then
[Guest]: make those 15 minutes count. There are a number of programs that would challenge you in 15
[Guest]: minutes, and then make them count. And then you may come to a point where they're not
[Guest]: challenging enough, then that's a good cue to ramp it up.
[Amit Varma]: Sounds good. I mean, for me, I guess maybe that would just be standing for 15 minutes.
[Amit Varma]: Like this is actually a sit stand desk, which is right here, but I don't spend so much time
[Amit Varma]: standing. It's just that, you know, depending on my degree of slump, I'll adjust the height.
[Amit Varma]: But that's that's kind of what happens. But the final category of advice really goes back
[Amit Varma]: to something we spoke about at the start of the episode, where you spoke about parents'
[Amit Varma]: attitude to their children, playing sports and so on. What advice would you have for
[Amit Varma]: parents when it comes to their kids, whether it is in the context of being serious about
[Amit Varma]: a sport, or whether it is just in context of what their kids do in their free time?
[Amit Varma]: Should parents really care about the proportion of physical activity that is actually getting
[Guest]: done? How does one look at this? That's an interesting question. I would say,
[Guest]: first of all, parents need to expose their children to a variety of sport. And in general,
[Guest]: try and keep an eye on what they show interest in. And I am not a very big fan of hum sham
[Guest]: ko khelne bhejte hain. I'm not a big fan of that because I feel like there's no goal in
[Guest]: goal to it. There is fun, there's mixing with other children and all of that, but that would
[Guest]: also happen in a sport. I definitely feel that, just like you talk about a musical instrument,
[Guest]: it's a discipline, it's a skill you're learning, and it's best started early. If you see that
[Guest]: your child is showing interest in a certain sport, then I would definitely say that parents
[Guest]: need to make that little extra effort to find the best coach or at school support every
[Guest]: single initiative the school is making to help your child do better in that sport. Because
[Guest]: somewhere I feel like our parents were very supportive, but they were also very supportive
[Guest]: because they were supportive for their children. It's not like they knew a lot about the sport
[Guest]: or anything like that. So whatever happened with us, in a sense happened accidentally.
[Guest]: But it doesn't mean it'll happen accidentally for everybody. And which is why I would say
[Guest]: my advice for parents is first of all, I think all children should follow a certain sport
[Guest]: and provide them with every facility to flourish in it. And if it actually comes to a point
[Guest]: where they actually show prodigal skills, then allow them to make it priority.
[Amit Varma]: No, there's a book I think it's by Amy Chua called Tiger Mom. And I'm getting the feeling
[Amit Varma]: that you'd be a bit of a tiger trainer, in the sense that you are so strict in terms
[Amit Varma]: of badminton, badminton is not fitness, or I'm sending my kids out to play kids out to
[Amit Varma]: play that's not fitness, you know, which I like, which is, which is great. I wish I had
[Amit Varma]: a trainer like you when I was seven. So my very final question, brutal reality. So and
[Amit Varma]: it's never too late to start. So you know, why not? So my final question for you is,
[Amit Varma]: it's a traditional one. So you're obviously familiar with it, that for my guests, and
[Amit Varma]: for me recommend some books, films, music that you like.
[Amit Varma]: Does it have to do with the rousing sport action?
[Amit Varma]: No, it's a general question, whatever is dear to you. So it could be something completely
[Amit Varma]: that no one may associate with any of the things you do. But whatever is dear to you,
[Amit Varma]: whatever is a desert island book or a desert island disc, whatever, something that you
[Amit Varma]: feel so strongly about, you'd love to share it with everyone.
[Guest]: Okay, so if I just talk about some of the topics that we've touched on on in the podcast,
[Guest]: then the books that we spoke about in, in terms of Gary Taubes and Nina Teicholz, and
[Guest]: you said you would also provide links to them. But apart from that, if you ask me about films,
[Guest]: I would say I have a very mixed bag. I would, I would watch something like Everything is
[Guest]: Illuminated by Jonathan Safran Foer. I would watch, I mean, a childhood favourite movie
[Guest]: has been The White Balloon, which is an Iranian movie about a little girl and her and her
[Guest]: wish to get a goldfish. I like a lot of Majid Majidi films as well. In terms of, in terms,
[Guest]: I really enjoy Tamilian music. I enjoy Arabic music. And so I would say, you know, just
[Guest]: Google some Tamilian and Arabic music and most of the tunes are, are lovely. I listen
[Guest]: to a lot of Indian classical music. That's books, films. I love, I love some series on
[Guest]: OTT now. I mean, I'm very predictable, Amit, in terms of loving, recently watched Panchayat
[Guest]: 2 because I didn't have access to it in Berlin. And so when I came to India, I watched it.
[Guest]: I really liked Schitt's Creek, for example, This Is Us. All the, all the, all the writing
[Guest]: that talks about mundane everyday life and how it can be quite delightful really appeals
[Guest]: to me. I have watched a lot of the documentaries on Netflix that are about sport and fitness
[Guest]: and I think I definitely recommend them. Especially, I don't remember one, and if it's still on
[Guest]: Netflix, but there was one that interviewed Serena Williams coach and some popular coaches
[Guest]: from football and, and basketball. And I would definitely recommend people to see, see them.
[Guest]: I'll link that from the show notes once you remember the name.
[Guest]: Yeah. And yeah, pretty much pretty, very predictable. I don't think I go very, I'm not much of an
[Guest]: explorer when it comes to books, I would say and, and films. Yeah. And especially having
[Guest]: been in the, in the course in the last six or eight months, I have really not explored
[Guest]: much in terms of films. But yeah, a lot of podcasts, I would, I would say, I mean, my
[Guest]: way of listening to podcasts is also apart from, for example, knowing that your podcast
[Guest]: is good, if I had to listen to something else, I would just, you know, go for a walk or something
[Guest]: and say, hey, I'm going to listen to this today and see for myself if I find it interesting
[Guest]: or not. And I listen to a lot of TED talks as well. I think it's like 15 minutes of quick
[Guest]: wisdom on on some things that sometimes you have these last minute questions or something
[Guest]: that's popped up in your head when you were like getting back home from somewhere. And
[Guest]: you're just like, hey, what are people saying about it? I guess TED talks are a good way
[Guest]: of getting, getting some quick knowledge.
[Amit Varma]: Great. Thank you so much today for your time and your patience. And, you know, you have
[Amit Varma]: passed another endurance test. Congratulations.
[Guest]: I am I am so glad. Thank you so much. And thanks for having me. And for, for yeah, really
[Guest]: delving so deep into sport, but also health and in general, lifestyle. But yeah, glad
[Guest]: to be here. And, and thanks once again.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode, hit the show notes, enter rabbit holes at
[Amit Varma]: will. You can follow Shruti on Twitter, Shruti underscore my underscore voice. You can follow
[Amit Varma]: me on Twitter at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A. You can browse past episodes of The Scene
[Amit Varma]: and the Unseen at sceneunseen.in. Thank you for listening. And remember, eat something
[Amit Varma]: healthy and work out today. Test your limits.
[Amit Varma]: Did you enjoy this episode of The Scene and the Unseen? If so, would you like to support
[Amit Varma]: the production of the show? You can go over to sceneunseen.in slash support and contribute
[Amit Varma]: any amount you like to keep this podcast alive and kicking. Thank you.